HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code
Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent
JIE JW WU , University of British Columbia, Kelowna, Canada
FATEMEH H. FARD, University of British Columbia, Kelowna, Canada
Large language models (LLMs) have significantly improved their ability to perform tasks in the field of code generation. However, there
is still a gap between LLMs being capable coders and being top-tier software engineers. The most recent trend is using LLM-based

arXiv:2406.00215v3 [cs.SE] 27 Jan 2025

agents to iterate the code generation process. Based on the observation that top-level software engineers often ask clarifying questions
to reduce Ambiguity in both requirements and coding solutions, we argue that the same should be applied to LLMs for code generation
tasks. For this purpose, we define the communication skills of LLMs as “being able to ask clarifying questions when the description
of the code generation problem has issues”. In this study, we restrict these issues to three matters from the software requirement
engineering field: inconsistent requirements, ambiguous requirements, and incomplete requirements. By asking probing questions
about the requirements of problem descriptions before generating the final code, the challenges of programming with LLMs, such as
unclear intent specification may be alleviated, resulting to a correct code in the initial iterations.
In this work, we conducted an empirical study on the benchmark and analysis of the communication skills of LLMs for code
generation. We created a new benchmark, HumanEvalComm, by modifying problem descriptions according to three issues mentioned
above, Inconsistency, Ambiguity, Incompleteness. We then experimented on HumanEvalComm with different Code LLMs, and a new
LLM agent approach, Code Clarification and Generation Agent (Okanagan), to identify and ask questions in ambiguous parts from
code and descriptions for further refining the generated code. In the evaluation, we introduced an LLM-based evaluator and created
Communication Rate and Good Question Rate as the evaluation metrics to represent the ratio of questions asked and questions with
good quality in responses. We found that more than 60% of responses from Code LLMs still generate code rather than ask questions
when the problem descriptions are manually modified according to different clarification categories. The Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate
of most Code LLMs drop by 35% ∼ 52% and by 17% ∼ 35% respectively, with statistical significance in each category for over 75%
numbers. Okanagan, as an LLM agent approach that uses LLM such as ChatGPT 3.5, effectively increases the Communication Rate
and Good Question Rate by an absolute 58% and 38%, respectively. Thus, Okanagan boosts Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate by an absolute
8% and 7%, respectively, when the problem descriptions are modified based on given clarification categories. This result indicates the
potential for achieving more effective communication capability using LLM agent. Our benchmark and full code are publicly available
at https://github.com/jie-jw-wu/human-eval-comm.

“Asking a good question can be valuable in and of itself, irrespective of the answer. It communicates
your respect for the other person.” - Adapted from the Iowa Peace Institute Message

1

INTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) [20, 66, 70, 74], such as OpenAI’s Codex [13], AlphaCode [39], and CodeGen [48],
possess a significantly capable ability to generate code snippets from natural language requirements. However, there
are several reported issues in LLMs, including problems with intent specification, problem decomposition [58], code
quality, and overconfidence [42, 43], as well as usability [40]. These issues indicate that there is still a substantial gap
between using LLM as a seasoned coder [3, 12, 54, 67, 85] and using LLM as a software engineer. As the responsibility of
software developers encompasses more than just writing code, current LLMs cannot fully replace professional software
This article is published in ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM).
Authors’ addresses: Jie JW Wu , University of British Columbia, Kelowna, 3333 University Way, Kelowna, B.C., V1V 1V7, Canada, jie.jw.wu@ubc.ca;
Fatemeh H. Fard, University of British Columbia, Kelowna, 3333 University Way, Kelowna, B.C., V1V 1V7, Canada, fatemeh.fard@ubc.ca.

1

2

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard

developers [9, 58]. At a high level, the gap lies in several critical aspects of software development beyond coding, such
as effective communications, explanation, requirements, design, domain knowledge, and the broader context of relevant
projects and components [47, 51, 63, 65, 69]. LLM-based agents are different from LLMs in that LLMs are underlying
models for text or code generation with pre-trained capability, while LLM-based agents deploy these models in a more
structured, action-driven environments [25]. Although some LLM-based agent systems have got a lot of attention, such
as SWE-Agent [82], CoderAgent [89], AutoGPT [1] and many others [60, 62, 77, 84], there is no study that investigates
the reported issues and systematically integrates them with the LLM agent approach for code generation. In this paper,
we are interested in applying the communication lens to inspect the gap, given that we envision effective communication
as a critical capability that ensures the necessary information is obtained for completing the coding tasks.
Let us take a step back to compare the communications of LLMs and software developers. The current LLMs are
typically evaluated by generating code in one or multiple attempts from one-off problem descriptions, without further
conversational inputs [5, 13, 39]. This means when the input problem description is error-prone or incomplete without
full context, the model has to generate the code without the chance to clarify questions that are necessary to ensure
the correctness of the code. In the literature, the communication capability (defined below) of Code LLM [19, 87] and
LLM agent [55, 78] is underrepresented and thus rarely emphasized and evaluated in the field of code generation. On
the contrary, given a software engineering task in real-world enterprises, professional developers use various ways of
communication, such as asking more questions in 1:1 conversations, group meetings, and Slack channels to obtain
more information and reduce Ambiguity about the detailed requirements, the context of the projects, and the design
alternatives. Proactive and effective communication is a critical skill in practice for top-level software developers to
accomplish their software engineering tasks reliably with high quality [31, 44, 46, 53, 76].
Inspired by this behavior, our motivation in this work is to study and evaluate the potential of LLMs on code
generation from the dimension of effective communication skills. We argue that the evaluation of the communication
capability of Code LLMs is, although underrepresented in literature, essential for the long-term success of AI systems in
completing the coding and software engineering tasks [26]. Thus, we intend to fill this literature gap in this research for
the code generation task. For highly specialized task of code generation, we argue that the AI system should proactively
recognize which information is missing, and find these missing pieces to be able to complete the task with high quality
and rigorousness, instead of just executing the given task and generating low-quality code as a result. Formally, the
communication capability, also referred to as communication skills or communication competency, in this study is defined
as follows: when the requirements are incomplete, inconsistent, or ambiguous in a programming problem,
and the model is prompted to either generate code or ask clarifying questions, how good the model is in
asking clarifying questions to recover the requirements necessary for solving the problem correctly. We use
the terms “LLMs” and “Code LLMs” interchangeably to represent LLMs for code generation tasks in this paper.
In this research, we conducted the first systematic empirical study on the communication skills of LLMs in code
generation tasks. First, we created a benchmark dataset, HumanEvalComm, for evaluating the degree of communication skills when generating code, based on the widely studied HumanEval code generation benchmark [13]. We
constructed the benchmark by manually modifying the requirements in the original problem description based on
concepts in Requirement Engineering (RE) [14, 68]. To achieve this, we created a taxonomy of clarification types:
Ambiguity, Inconsistency, and Incompleteness (See Section 2). Based on the taxonomy, we then changed each problem
description by applying one or a combination of clarification types. Based on the new HumanEvalComm benchmark,
we further evaluated different models to inspect the degree of their communication skills when certain information
is manually modified to be ambiguous, inconsistent, or incomplete in the problem description. In the evaluation, we

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 3
introduced an LLM-based evaluator and proposed new evaluation metrics to effectively measure the communication
skills of the models. We also proposed a LLM agent approach, Code Clarification and Generation Agent (Okanagan), as
an LLM-based agent with multi-round structure and customized prompt for code generation task. A key feature of
Okanagan is the ability to ask clarifying questions about the input problem descriptions needed for generating correct
code.
In terms of findings, for manual modifications using HumanEvalComm, more than 60% of responses from Code
LLMs still generate code. Typically, the Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate of Code LLMs drop by 35% ∼ 52% and by 17% ∼
35%, respectively. Among the three clarification types, the Incompleteness category results in higher communication
rates and Good Question Rates, but lower Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate than the Ambiguity and Inconsistency categories
for Code LLMs. Okaganan, the proposed LLM agent approach that uses ChatGPT 3.5 as LLM, effectively increased
Communication Rate and Good Question Rate by an absolute 59% and 5%, respectively. This resulted in an increase
in Test Pass Rate and Pass@1 by 25% and 15%, respectively. This result indicates the potential for more effective
communication capability for LLM agent compared with Code LLMs.
To summarize, we have made the following contributions:
• We created a new benchmark, HumanEvalComm, for evaluating the degree of communication skills of LLMs
for code by manually modifying the requirements in the original problem description based on RE concepts:
clarification types of Ambiguity, Inconsistency, Incompleteness.
• We proposed an LLM-agent approach, Code Clarification and Generation Agent (Okanagan), to enhance the
communication capability of the models, and thus lead to better code generation capability, in terms of Pass@1,
based on asking clarifying questions when the problem description is ambiguous, inconsistent, or incomplete.
The contribution of Okanagan is a multi-round structure with customized prompts for asking clarifying questions
when needed in code generation tasks.
• We conducted the first empirical study on the evaluation of communication competence in code generation
task for both Code LLMs and Okanagan on HumanEvalComm. In the evaluation, we introduced LLM-based
evaluator and proposed two new evaluation metrics, Communication Rate and Good Question Rate, to effectively
measure communication skills of the models.
Our benchmark and replication package are made public at https://github.com/jie-jw-wu/human-eval-comm to
support open data and open science principles.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the benchmark construction of our research.
Section 3 explains the design of our empirical study. Section 4 summarizes the results for RQs. Section 4.4.3 includes
more analysis and discussions on the results. Threats to validity are explained in Section 7, followed by summarizing
the related works in Section 8. Finally, Section 9 concludes this work.
2
2.1

BENCHMARK CONSTRUCTION
Benchmark Collection

Existing Benchmarks. We first start by examining the existing benchmarks for code generation. To the best of our
knowledge, all of the existing benchmarks (e.g., HumanEval [13], CoNaLa [86], Galeras [56], APPS [28], and recent
SWE-bench [33]) in code generation are tasked with letting the model generate the code directly as prediction, without
giving the model the opportunity to ask for additional information. Notably, the input of these datasets is well-written

4

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard
Clarification Category

Ambiguity

1a

✓

1c

Inconsistency

Incompleteness

164
164

✓

1p
2ac

✓
✓

2cp
✓

Total

—

—

164
162

✓
✓

2ap

Count

✓

34

✓

74

—

762

Table 1. Problem descriptions and statistics with different combinations of clarification types being applied in HumanEvalComm.
The smaller size for 2ac (same applies for 2cp and 2ap) is because we directly applied a combination of two clarification types from
1a, 1c strictly, and we create a new modified problem as 2ac only if applying a combination of 1a and 1c leads to a new problem
description that is different from either 1a and 1c. 2cp and 2ap have smaller count because the ambiguous (a) or inconsistent (c) parts
are removed in (p) for a large number of problems.

and organized by professional human annotations. However, in real-world scenarios, the problem descriptions from
humans could be a lack of computational thinking, unclear in the intent specification, or ambiguous in requirements [40].
HumanEvalComm Overview. To assess the communication ability of Code LLMs and LLM-based agent, we chose
to hand-craft a new benchmark based on a widely used code generation dataset, HumanEval [13]. Our objective is to
modify the problem description based on RE concepts so that it should trigger clarifying questions, which are necessary
for generating the correct code. HumanEval is composed of 164 hand-crafted coding problems in Python and was
created to evaluate the coding capabilities of Codex. Each problem has a function signature, docstring, body, and unit
tests. The average number of ground-truth test cases per problem is 7.77. HumanEval is chosen as it is a benchmark
dataset with test cases and is widely used for evaluating LLMs [45, 50, 55, 87]. Using HumanEval, we changed each
problem description manually to develop HumanEvalComm, which we will use for evaluation in our work. This is
done using a taxonomy of clarification types as described below. Besides, we provided explanation about why we chose
manual method instead of automated method to modify problems in Section 5.2.
Taxonomy of Clarification Types. To modify the problem description in an organized way, we propose the
following clarification types based on both the literature in Requirement Engineering (RE) [14, 68] and our understanding
of how feasible can the RE concepts be applied to problems in HumanEval:
• Ambiguity: Some statements in the problem descriptions could be ambiguous and correspond to different
concepts.
• Inconsistency: Some statements in the problem descriptions show conflict or inconsistency between each
other.
• Incompleteness: Some concepts or conditions are missing in the problem descriptions.
Guideline for Modifying Problem Description. For each problem description, we manually change the problem
description with regard to different clarification types. As different engineers might approach the same problem
differently, therefore impacting the consistency and standardization of the modified problems [64], we describe the
guidelines for the manual work. Modifying the problem descriptions is done manually by a software engineer with nearly
a decade of experience in the industry. A second software engineer with more than 15 years of development experience

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 5
Clarification
Type

Problem Description

N/A (Original)
def incr_list ( l : list ) :
""" Return list with elements incremented by 1 .
>>> incr_list ([ 1 , 2 , 3 ])
[2 , 3 , 4 ]
>>> incr_list ([ 5 , 3 , 5 , 2 , 3 , 3 , 9 , 0 , 123 ])
[6 , 4 , 6 , 3 , 4 , 4 , 10 , 1 , 124 ]
"""

Ambiguity

The docstring is ambiguous as the number is not specified.
def incr_list ( l : list ) :
""" Return list with elements incremented by a number .
>>> incr_list ([ 1 , 2 , 3 ])
[2 , 3 , 4 ]
>>> incr_list ([ 5 , 3 , 5 , 2 , 3 , 3 , 9 , 0 , 123 ])
[6 , 4 , 6 , 3 , 4 , 4 , 10 , 1 , 124 ]
"""

Incompleteness

The docstring is an unfinished sentence.
def incr_list ( l : list ) :
""" Return list with elements incremented
"""

Inconsistency

Result of the two test examples conflict with the docstring description as well as each other
def incr_list ( l : list ) :
""" Return list with elements incremented by 1 .
>>> incr_list ([ 1 , 2 , 3 ])
[3 , 4 , 5 ]
>>> incr_list ([ 5 , 3 , 5 , 2 , 3 , 3 , 9 , 0 , 123 ])
[7 , 5 , 7 , 4 , 5 , 5 , 11 , 2 , 125 ]
"""

Inconsistency &
Ambiguity

The docstring is ambiguous with the unspecified number for incrementing, and the results of
test examples conflict with the docstring.
def incr_list ( l : list ) :
""" Return list with elements incremented by a number .
>>> incr_list ([ 1 , 2 , 3 ])
[3 , 4 , 5 ]
>>> incr_list ([ 5 , 3 , 5 , 2 , 3 , 3 , 9 , 0 , 123 ])
[7 , 5 , 7 , 4 , 5 , 5 , 11 , 2 , 125 ]
"""

Table 2. Example of HumanEvalComm built upon HumanEval. The modified problem descriptions are shown in this table for problem
number 42 of HumanEval. Specifically, the descriptions of the problem were modified to be inconsistent, ambiguous, or incomplete.
The main goal of the HumanEvalComm dataset is to evaluate the degree of communication.

6

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard

reviewed the changed descriptions. The disagreements were marked and discussed among the two annotators until they
reached an agreement about the changes, according to the definitions of Ambiguity, Inconsistency, and Incompleteness
from RE. Each problem description was read carefully, and modifications were applied to the problem description. The
definitions and examples of ambiguous, inconsistent, or incomplete requirements were reviewed by both people before
conducting the manual modification of the problem descriptions, although both of them have requirements engineering
expertise.
For each problem, we applied six different modifications: (1a) making the problem description ambiguous; (1c)
modifying the description to be inconsistent; (1p) changing the problem description to make it incomplete. The next
three modifications that we refer to as (2ac), (2cp), and (2ap) are a combination of the initial changes, being “ambiguous
and inconsistent”, “inconsistent and incomplete”, and “ambiguous and incomplete”, respectively. For any of the above
modifications, our standard is that applying the modification to the problem should trigger clarifying questions,
which are necessary for generating the correct code. To ensure the standardization of the manual work, for
each clarification category, the criteria to modify the problem and disagreements with the modified problems were
thoroughly discussed in several discussion sessions and rounds to change each record. Besides, we have also added this
to the Threats of Validity section in the paper. Below are the detailed guideline for each clarification category:
• Clarification Category 1a: Specifically, for 1a, to make the descriptions ambiguous, we tried to change the
statement such that a human reader can interpret the statement in different ways. However, in practice, we
found it very difficult to perform ambiguous modifications: adding Ambiguity in description only may not be
enough to trigger clarifying questions, since we have additional information such as test examples, common
sense reasoning, and function signatures. In other words, the description becomes ambiguous, but the test
examples and function signatures are also given in the description, so that the right requirements can be inferred
and thus correct code can be generated, without having to ask clarifying questions. Our solution to this issue
is that we apply both Ambiguity and incorrectness to the description because it’s much easier and safer to
trigger clarifying questions using Ambiguity and a certain level of incorrectness, instead of Ambiguity only.
For example, changing the description from “sort the array descendingly” to “sort the array” may not trigger a
question, because the function signature or test cases can imply the sorting is in descending order. However,
changing the description to “sort the array (descendingly or ascendingly)” can trigger questions.
• Clarification Category 1c: For 1c, to make the descriptions inconsistent, we mainly changed the examples
such that the output of the example does not match or contradict the problem description. It should be noted
that most of the problem descriptions in the HumanEval benchmark contain examples of test cases with the
input and output. When applying inconsistent modification, for each problem, we changed the output of the test
examples in a meaningful way rather than randomly, to enhance the contradiction between test examples and
text description. Note that 1c is different from 1a, as 1c focuses mainly on changing the test examples so that
they contradict the problem description, while 1a changes the requirements so that the correct requirement is
combined with incorrect requirements, making it unclear and confusing which one is the correct requirement.
• Clarification Category 1p: In terms of 1p, we removed some parts of the description as incomplete modification.
We made sure that after applying the incomplete modification, it’s not possible to generate the correct code,
without asking questions to recover the missing content.
• Clarification Category 2ac, 2cp, 2ap: For 2ac, 2cp, and 2ap, we directly applied a combination of two
clarification types from 1a, 1c, and 1p. For these cases, we create a new modification only if applying a

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 7
combination of two types leads to a new description that is different from any of the two types. Therefore, for
each problem, 1a, 1c, and 1p always exist, but 2ac, 2cp, or 2ap may not exist. Overall, the process of changing
the descriptions took approximately 100 hours for initial modification and 30 hours to review and discuss the
disagreements and come to a consensus.
Table 2 shows an example of the original problem description and three modified versions for problem number 42 in
HumanEval. In this example, for Ambiguity, “incremented by 1” is modified to “incremented by a number”, forming
an ambiguous description. For Incompleteness, a part of the text description and example test cases are removed. For
Inconsistency, the output of examples is modified so that it contradicts the text description. For Inconsistency and
Ambiguity, a combination of Inconsistency and Ambiguity is applied, making it a more challenging case to generate the
correct code. It is worth mentioning that before constructing HumanEvalComm, we manually verified the problem
descriptions in the HumanEval dataset and verified that the original problem descriptions do not have clarification
issues (Ambiguity, Inconsistency, or Incompleteness), so we chose all of the 164 problems in HumanEval dataset in our
evaluation.
2.2

Evaluation Measurement

We introduce the following metrics to effectively evaluate the communication competency of the models in code
generation tasks.
Communication Rate. We propose the communication rate to evaluate the degree of communication skills for a
given model. The communication rate is intended to capture the percentage of responses with clarifying questions
instead of code for problems in HumanEvalComm. In the experiment, the prompt we use lets the model “either generate
Python3 code (Respond directly with code only with markdown), or ask clarifying questions”. Therefore, in this work,
we define the communication rate as the percentage of responses with no code snippets (non-code) for the initial
modified problem descriptions:
#𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑠 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑡 𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒
#𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑠
In the experiment, we found that this simple metric that distinguishes whether the model returns code or non-code is
𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑛_𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 =

already an effective approximation of communication skills.
Good Question Rate. In this research, we leverage a new LLM-based evaluator to give a question quality label for
clarifying questions returned by the models. The labels are Good (The model asks insightful questions that help recover
all the missing info), Fair (The model asks OK questions, but the questions do not fully cover the missing info), Bad (The
model asks no questions or irrelevant questions that do not help at all to recover the missing/clarifying information).
Given the question quality label, we define Good Question Rate as the percentage of responses with Good question
quality labels:
#𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑠 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝐺𝑜𝑜𝑑 𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙𝑠
#𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑠
Pass@K. In evaluation, pass@k is a popular and widely used metric for evaluating the task of code generation [13,
𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑑_𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛_𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 =

45, 91]. Pass@k is defined as the ratio of “solved” problems, in which as a problem is ‘solved’ if any of the 𝑘 code
samples pass all the tests. Hence, we used Pass@1 in our evaluation.
Test Pass Rate. Besides the widely used pass@k, Test Pass Rate is also commonly used for evaluating code generation [28, 50]. Specifically, the Test Pass Rate is defined as the proportion of successfully passed test cases in relation to

8

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard

the total number of test cases for LLM-generated code. This metric is useful in this work since it helps capture whether
getting the right information by asking clarifying questions can indeed increase the correctness of generated code.
3

EMPIRICAL STUDY

3.1

Research Questions

In this section, we describe the research questions that we explore in this study.
RQ1: How do Code LLMs perform in communication competency when requirements in the problem
descriptions are incomplete, inconsistent, ambiguous?
The rationale of RQ1 is centered around understanding and examining the current Code LLMs regarding their communication capabilities in code generation. The aim is to provide an initial understanding of the limitations and
areas where Code LLMs may fall short in their communication skills. We evaluated different Code LLMs on carefully
curated problems in the new benchmark, HumanEvalComm, where problem descriptions are manually modified to be
incomplete, inconsistent, and ambiguous. We evaluated and compared the results of Code LLMs for different clarification
categories, where one or two clarification types are applied to the original problems.
RQ2: How does Okanagan perform compared with Code LLMs in terms of communication skills?
Given the recent advances in LLM-based agent in addressing various applications [78], RQ2 aims to investigate the
communication capabilities of our LLM agent approach, Okanagan, in comparison with Code LLMs. Therefore, we
evaluated Okanagan which has a multi-round structure with customized prompts for code generation tasks. We analyzed
and compared the results of Okanagan and Code LLMs.
RQ3: How to assess the LLM-based evaluator and the evaluation metrics generated by the evaluator?
The aim of RQ3 is to investigate and assess the LLM-based evaluator used in our evaluation. In our evaluation, we used
the LLM-based evaluator to 1) rate the quality of the clarifying questions and 2) generate an answer to reply to the
clarifying questions from the models [22, 36]. Therefore, it’s important to evaluate the reliability of the LLM-based
evaluator in our experiment. We conducted a manual evaluation of LLM-based evaluator where we recruited students
at the University of British Columbia to manually assess the results of LLM-based evaluator and manually mark the
quality of models’ responses.
RQ4: What are the impacts of different prompt strategies and hyperparameters?
The goal of RQ4 is to investigate the impact of different prompt variants and hyperparameters important for the evaluation. We conducted experiments to evaluate the results of 1) using different hyperparameters, including temperatures
and the ratio of removed content in the problem description for 1p, and 2) using different prompt strategies.
3.2

Methodology Overview

Overview. Figure 1 shows the overview of our methodology for collecting the benchmark and conducting the empirical
study. We first create the HumanEvalComm benchmark, by modifying 164 problem descriptions of the original
HumanEval benchmark for code generation tasks using the taxonomy of clarification types, as described in Section 2.
Second, we conduct evaluation and empirical studies based on HumanEvalComm to evaluate the communication
competency of different models, including Code LLMs and LLM Agents, as described in section 3.3 and section 3.4.
Figure 2 shows the flowchart for the evaluation of models, Code LLMs, and Okanagan. For each programming
problem in the HumanEvalComm, there are up to six modified problem descriptions as described earlier in Table 1. For
each modified problem, a prompt is used as the input of the model to either generate code or ask clarifying questions

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 9

Evaluation and Empirical Study

Benchmark Collection
(HumanEvalComm)
164 Programming
Problems in HumanEval
Benchmark
762 Modified Problems by
Applying Taxonomy of
Clarification Types
- Ambiguity: 164
- Inconsistency: 164
- Incompleteness: 164
- Combinations: 108

Programming
Problems in
HumanEvalComm
Benchmark

- Code LLMs
- LLM Agent
(Okanagan)

Evaluation Metrics
- Communication Rate
- Good Question Rate
- Pass@K, Pass Rate

RQ1: Communication
Competency of Code LLMs

RQ2: Communication
Competency of Okanagan

RQ3: Reliability of
LLM-based Evaluator

RQ4: Prompt Strategies and
Hyperparameter Impact

Fig. 1. The visual illustration of the methodology on HumanEvalComm benchmark (with statistics) and the evaluation of communication skills for Code LLMs and LLM Agent.

if needed. Then, if the model asks clarifying questions rather than generates code directly, the questions are sent to
an LLM-based Evaluator, which evaluates the questions and generates a reply to answer the questions, based on all of
the available information, including the modified problem, original problem, and the clarifying questions. Finally, the
answers and the previous conversations are sent to the model to generate the code again directly. We have also added
examples in Section 5.1 to better understand the interaction between the evaluated models and the prompts.

Fig. 2. Flowchart for the evaluation of models, either Code LLMs or Okanagan (LLM agent), in communication capability.

LLM-based evaluator. With the advances of LLMs, a recent series of work has been proposed to use the powerful
LLMs as the reference-free evaluators on Natural Language Generation (NLG) tasks [22, 34–36, 72]. Given the expensive
human efforts of human evaluations, we used the LLM-based evaluator to generate an answer to reply to the list of
clarifying questions from the models [22, 36]. We prompted the LLM-based evaluator with the modified problem,
original problem, and clarifying questions. The role of the LLM-based evaluator in this work is to 1) generate answers

10

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard

to the clarifying questions, and 2) calculate Good Question Rate, represented by an integer. The Good Question Rate is
one of the evaluation metrics in our experiment. As for implementation, we used GPT 3.5 in the LLM-based evaluator
in the evaluation. We tested both zero-shot and one-shot prompting, but in our evaluation, we found that one-shot
prompting does not improve performance. This also aligns with the finding in literature [22, 36]. The detailed prompt
of LLM-based evaluator is shown as follows.

Prompt for LLM-Based Evaluator:
The original description of a coding problem is modified so that the requirements become inconsistent, incomplete,
or ambiguous. Given the modified description, some clarifying questions were raised to clarify the description.
Given the original and modified problem description, evaluate the quality of the clarifying questions. Please
provide an integer representing the quality of questions (3: Good questions that recover the modified requirements;
2: Fair questions but they cannot help recover the modified requirements; 1: No questions).
QUALITY=[your int]
Please also provide answers to the clarifying questions to recover the modified requirements in the original
problem description compared to the modified one. If there are no clarifying questions at all, return empty
answers.
ANSWERS=“‘[your answer]”’
Please strictly follow the format QUALITY=[the int] and ANSWERS=“‘[the answer]”’ in the response! Surround
your answer with markdown!
### Questions: {clarifying_questions}
### Modified Problem Description: {problem}
### Original Description: {original_problem}

We manually checked the results of the LLM-based evaluator to see whether the output of the evaluator, the generated
answers, and the evaluation of the questions, were correct. Overall, the generated answers and Good Question Rates
are reasonable, but we do see some mistakes in both the generated answers and the Good Question Rates. For the Good
Question Rates, there are some cases where the Good Question Rate from the LLM-based evaluator is 2 or 3 when
there are no clarifying questions: For example, the “questions” from the model are a combination of explanation and
code, but no clarifying questions. This is somewhat related to the reported limitation [22] that LLM evaluators prefer
to give high scores to responses that conflict with the facts in the dialogue history [41]. For generated answers, we
sometimes observe that the provided answers do not recover the original requirements, due to either the evaluator
itself or “no clarifying questions” mentioned above. To mitigate this issue, we have optimized the prompt for the
LLM-based evaluator several times and checked the results manually. This includes adding sentences like “Please strictly
follow the format QUALITY=[the int] and ANSWERS=[the answer] in the response!”, and “Surround your answer
with markdown!” which eliminated many cases of format errors (answers and rates cannot be extracted correctly).
Although the LLM-based evaluator shows effectiveness in our task, we understand that LLM-based NLG evaluation is
still challenging [22, 41], and future work is required to address the errors mentioned above.

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 11
3.3

Code Large Language Models

We performed our evaluation on five widely used LLMs. This includes three open-sourced instruction-tuned Code
LLMs, one open-sourced instruction-tuned LLM, and one commercial LLM. For open-source models, we used models
with the largest possible model size within our limited computing resources in our evaluation.
• CodeLlama (Instruction tuned version, 13B) [57] is an open-source LLM released by Meta for coding, built on
top of Llama 2, with foundation models and instruction models. CodeLlama was chosen because of its wide
usage and top performance in HumanEval. We tested the instruction model CodeLlama-Instruct-13B in our
experiment since we did not have the computing resources to run models with 34B. The same applies to the
rest open-source models.
• DeepSeek Coder (Instruction tuned version, 7B) [24] is an open-source Code LLM trained on both 87% code
and 13% natural language. Each of the models was pre-trained on 2 trillion tokens. We selected this model
because it achieved top 5 performance in Big Code Models Leaderboard [2] on the HuggingFace platform. The
Big Code Models Leaderboard [2] evaluates the performance of base multilingual code generation models on
the HumanEval benchmark and MultiPL-E. We used the model of 7 billion parameters in the evaluation.
• DeepSeek Chat (Instruction tuned version, 7B) [8] is an open-source LLM released by DeepSeek AI, trained on
datasets of 2 trillion tokens. We selected this model because we wanted to evaluate the communication skills of
models trained from different sources such as natural languages, code, and a combination of both. We compared
its performance with the DeepSeek Coder to understand whether more natural languages in pre-training are
beneficial to communication skills. We used the model of 7 billion parameters in the evaluation.
• CodeQwen1.5 Chat (Instruction tuned version, 7B) [6] is an open-souce Code LLM released by Qwen Team,
trained on 3 trillion tokens of code data. CodeQwen1.5 Chat is the Code-Specific version of Qwen1.5. The model
is a transformer-based decoder-only language model and includes group query attention (GQA) for efficient
inference. We selected this model because it achieved top 5 performance in Big Code Models Leaderboard [2].
• ChatGPT, released by OpenAI are powerful models for generation tasks. We used parameter-frozen versions
of models (gpt-3.5-turbo-0125) to ensure the reproducibility of the evaluation results.
Note that all of the evaluated models above are instruction-tuned models because, in the evaluation, the ability to
ask clarifying questions with the given prompts is needed for the models. Besides instruction-tuned models, there are
also foundation models, but we didn’t report results for foundation models. We found that foundation models without
instruction tuned are not suitable for our evaluation, because their task is only to complete code and are not capable of
instructions such as “either generate code or ask clarifying questions”.
3.4

LLM-Agent Approach (Okanagan)

Following the recent works in LLM agent, including collaboration mechanisms for LLM agents [88] and self-correcting
strategies of LLMs [52], we proposed and evaluated an LLM agent approach, Okanagan, that leverages multi-round
structure and customized prompt format for asking clarifying questions in code generation tasks. Figure 3 provides a
visual illustration of the process of Okanagan. Specifically, we introduce three rounds in Okanagan:
• Round 1: the agent generates code directly given the modified problem.
• Round 2: the agent generates clarifying questions (if needed) given the modified problem and generated code. If
no questions, directly return the code generated in Round 1.

12

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard

Fig. 3. An illustration of the process of Okanagan, an LLM agent approach.

• Round 3: the agent generates code again, given the above conversation history (including the modified problem,
clarifying questions, and their answers).
This structure is inspired by the existing LLM agents approach [88], with three rounds and customized prompts for
our task of code generation. In terms of actions in each round, the action in Round 1 is to generate code. The action
in Round 2 is to ask clarifying questions. As mentioned above, the code in Round 1 is returned if no questions are
asked. Otherwise, a reflection is conducted to generate code again with the previous conversation history that includes

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 13
clarifying questions and answers provided by the LLM-based evaluator. We adopted this structure because it can be
easily extended to different parameter values. For example, we stop at Round 3 (in other words, we set the total number
of rounds to 3) in our evaluation, but we can set a different number of rounds in theory. Besides the number of rounds,
other parameters can be changed as well. We describe the set of parameters for Okanagan as follows:
(1) number of agents (default is 1).
(2) number of rounds (default is 3).
(3) Action in each round: Generate code or ask questions (default is: Round 1 - Generate code, Round 2 - Ask
questions, Round 3 - Generate code with Reflection)
(4) thinking pattern: Debate or Reflection [88]. (default is Reflection1 )
Note that we tried to minimize the complexity of Okanagan using default parameters such as one agent and three
rounds, but in future work, the structure can easily scale from single-agent to multi-agents by setting the parameter for
the number of agents. If more than one agent is used, and when the thinking pattern is Debate in a given round, the
agents would exchange their previous responses as a way of collaboration. Given our specific task, compared with [88],
we added a new parameter in Okanagan: action in each round, to indicate the action for agents in a given round.
Okanagan Implementation in Evaluation. In our evaluation, we tested Okanagan using the default parameters
as mentioned. We used ChatGPT 3.5 as the LLM in each of the three rounds in Okanagan mainly for easier comparison
with ChatGPT 3.5. For other LLM agent methods to compare in evaluation, we searched other publicly available LLM
agent but did not find an appropriate open-sourced LLM agent implementation for code generation task with a focus
and potential action to ask clarifying questions. Table 14 in Appendix shows the prompts used in Okanagan. Besides,
we also switched base model in Okanagan to ensure a fair comparison. Concretely, we implemented the method using
another open-sourced model (DeepSeek Coder) instead of ChatGPT 3.5 as the base LLM.
3.5

Experiment Setup

Computational Resources. In experiments, we implemented our evaluation in Python 3.12. We partially used the code
from [50] on the Non-Determinism of ChatGPT and from [45] on testing open-source models. All of the experiments
for ChatGPT and Okanagan were conducted on a server with an Intel i7-6700K CPU (4.00 GHz), 32 GB RAM. The other
experiments for open-source models that require GPUs were conducted on an Intel Xeon Gold 6130 CPU (2.1GHz), 44
GB RAM, and 4 GPUs (Tesla V100-SXM2-16GB). The names of the HuggingFace models we use in the experiments are
deepseek-coder-6.7b-instruct, deepseek-llm-7b-chat, CodeQwen1.5-7B-Chat, and CodeLlama-13b-Instruct-hf.
Cost and Runtime. Regarding the expenditure of the experiments, excluding AgentCoder, the total cost in using
ChatGPT 3.5 is less than 15 USD. This cost includes the use of ChatGPT 3.5 from the LLM-based evaluator for all the
models, and the usage in Okanagan and ChatGPT as models themselves. Separately, the cost for running AgentCoder
alone in HumanEvalComm is about 36 USD, as it involves multiple OpenAI API calls within AgentCoder. The cost
of ChatGPT 3.5 (‘gpt-3.5-turbo-0125’) is $0.0005/1k input and $0.0015/1k output. The total runtime for Okanagan or
ChatGPT as the model in the experiment is less than half an hour to be conservative. The runtime for other open-source
models depends on the computing resources such as memory and GPUs. Note that we have tried our best to reduce
the redundant prompts between dialogues for simplcity and cost saving purpose: we used two prompts for a given
model in each problem, which are necessary for a model to gather answers to its clarifying questions and generate
1 Debate can be used only when multiple agents are used. In the implementation of Okanagan, we use a single agent, and thus in Round 3, the single

agent reflects on the generated code in Round 1 based on the additional information in Round 1 (generated code) and Round 2 (clarifying questions and
their answers provided by LLM-based evaluator).

14

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard

correct code. For LLM-based evalator, we used only one prompt that generates both the answer to the question and the
question quality label used in Good Question Rate.
Statistical Test Configuration. In this study, for each clarification category, we performed an independent twosample t-test to assess whether there is a statistically significant difference between the correlations of original pass
rates in HumanEval (specifically, Pass@K and Test Pass Rate) and the pass rates in HumanEvalComm. We assume the
null hypothesis 𝐻 0 that there is no significant difference between Test Pass Rate or Pass@1 across the groups. The
alternative hypothesis 𝐻 1 posits that there is a significant difference in the Test Pass Rate or Pass@1 between the
groups. The test compares the means of two independent groups, testing the null hypothesis that the means are equal.
The calculated t-statistic quantifies the ratio of the difference between the group means to the variability of the scores
within the groups. We reported the associated p-values, indicating the probability of observing the data under the null
hypothesis. A p-value below the significance level 𝛼 = 0.01, 0.05, 0.1 leads to rejecting the null hypothesis, indicating a
significant difference between the two groups.

4

RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

4.1

Communication Competency of Code LLMs on HumanEvalComm (RQ1)

To answer RQ1, we conducted experiments to evaluate the communication capability for problems in HumanEvalComm.
Since we focus on the results of Code LLMs in RQ1, the results of Okanagan will be discussed separately in RQ2. For
each problem modified according to a category clarification type or combinations of clarification types, we followed the
process in Figure 2. We calculated the following evaluation metrics: communication rate, good question rate, Pass@1,
and Test Pass Rate. We compared Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate between the modified problem in HumanEvalComm and
the original problem in HumanEval. Table 3 summarizes the overall results we generated for the evaluated models.
Figure 4 rearranges the numbers in Table 3 in a visual illustration to facilitate a more direct comparison between
different models. We first analyzed the overall results, then we looked into the results in each clarification category. For
each category, we evaluated them with statistical testing using the Student’s t-test and obtained the p-value.
Let’s first look at the communication rate. From Table 3 and Figure 4, the communication rate for ChatGPT, CodeLlama,
and CodeQwen1.5 Chat is below 20%, significantly less than the perfect score of 100%. This means that for a problem
description in which clarifying questions are needed for generating correct code, these models raise questions with less
than a 20% chance. The recently released DeepSeek Coder and DeepSeek Chat achieved higher communication rates of
30.76% and 37.93%. One hypothesis to explain this is that the general capability from DeepSeek Chat is important for a
high communication rate.
Besides communication rate, Good Question Rate is also a useful metric, because it reports the percentage of questions
labeled as Good questions based on the content of questions using an LLM-based evaluator. In terms of Good Question
Rate, likewise, as shown Table 3 and Figure 4, ChatGPT, CodeLlama, and CodeQwen1.5 Chat have a lower average
question quality than DeepSeek Coder and DeepSeek Chat. Particularly, ChatGPT has a much lower rate than other
open-source models. From our manual inspection, one of the reasons is because the open-source models sometimes do
not follow the instructions to return either code blocks or questions. They sometimes output code blocks together with
some explanations. This type of response is not a clarifying question, but the LLM-based Evaluator sometimes labels
them as “Good Question”, which we described in detail in section 3.2. Regardless, based on the numbers, there is still
significant room to improve on Good Question Rate.

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 15
For pass rate measurements, ChatGPT, CodeLlama, and DeepSeek Chat achieve overall lower results than CodeQwen1.5 Chat and DeepSeek Coder for both Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate, based on Table 3 and Figure 4. The trend
is similar for both Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate. One hypothesis is that this result is in part due to the higher Pass@1
and Test Pass Rate of CodeQwen1.5 Chat and DeepSeek Coder in the original HumanEval benchmark. On the relative
change, we see an increase in Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate from original HumanEval to HumanEvalComm for DeepSeek
Chat. According to our investigation, this is because of illegal response formats: many responses from DeepSeek Chat
for the original HumanEval do not have code markup, so these responses without code markup failed all the tests. For
the rest open-source models, the relative drop in the Pass@1 is between 35% and 52%. The relative drop in the Test Pass
Rate is between 17% and 35%.
Model
HmEval
ChatGPT
CodeLlama
CodeQwen1.5 Chat
DeepSeek Coder
DeepSeek Chat
Okanagan (Base=ChatGPT)
Okanagan (Base=DeepSeek

65.58%
29.88%
76.83%
71.78%
12.8%
27.45%
21.25%

Pass@1
Test Pass Rate
Comm.
HmEvalComm HmEval
HmEvalComm Rate
31.34%
19.35%
47.61%
45.68%
26.32%
39.62%
38.06%

76.42%
45.71%
84.4%
79.44%
13.86%
33.45%
24.3%

49.39%
37.79%
62.89%
62.25%
44.52%
56.98%
52.72%

14.21%
10.16%
4.82%
30.76%
37.93%
72.73%
82.51%

Good
Question
Rate
13.43%
37.55%
41.68%
61.42%
58.71%
52.24%
60.13%

Coder)

Table 3. Evaluation result across all clarification categories on Pass@1, Test Pass Rate, communication rate, and Good Question Rate
with different models on HumanEvalComm (HmEvalComm in the table). Additionally, the Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate on the original
problems in HumanEval (HmEval in the table) are also shown. Top 4 results are marked as bold.

Fig. 4. Comparison of the effectiveness of the models in Communication Rate, Good Question Rate (left), and Pass@1, Test Pass Rate
(right). Note that in the right figure, the stars represent the original performance of the corresponding model with the same color in
the HumanEval benchmark. This shows visually how the performance has changed when the problem description is modified.

Breakdown on Categories with One Clarification Type. Besides overall results, we would like to further
understand the corresponding results within different clarification categories. Table 4 shows the results breakdown
on the clarification categories 1a, 1c, and 1p, where only one level of clarification type (Ambiguity, Inconsistency, and

16
Clarification
Category

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard
Model
HmEval
ChatGPT

65.58%

CodeLlama

29.88%

CodeQwen1.5 Chat

76.83%

DeepSeek Coder

71.78%

DeepSeek Chat

12.8%

Okanagan

27.45%

ChatGPT

65.58%

CodeLlama

29.88%

CodeQwen1.5 Chat

76.83%

DeepSeek Coder

71.78%

DeepSeek Chat

12.8%

Okanagan

27.45%

ChatGPT

65.58%

CodeLlama

29.88%

CodeQwen1.5 Chat

76.83%

DeepSeek Coder

71.78%

DeepSeek Chat

12.8%

Okanagan

27.45%

1a

1c

1p

Pass@1
Test Pass Rate
Comm.
HmEvalComm HmEval
HmEvalComm Rate
(p-value)
(p-value)
33.77%***
(0.000)
16.46%***
(0.004)
46.34%***
(0.000)
43.29%***
(0.000)
21.95%**
(0.029)
44.81%***
(0.001)

76.42%

53.25%**
(0.027)
32.93%
(0.553)
67.68%***
(0.000)
61.59%*
(0.051)
39.63%***
(0.000)
57.14%***
(0.000)

76.42%

27.95%***
(0.001)
15.24%***
(0.000)
46.95%***
(0.000)
45.12%***
(0.000)
21.95%**
(0.029)
36.65%*
(0.082)

76.42%

45.71%
84.4%
79.44%
13.86%
33.45%

45.71%
84.4%
79.44%
13.86%
33.45%

45.71%
84.4%
79.44%
13.86%
33.45%

54.98%***
(0.000)
36.24%**
(0.037)
62.62%***
(0.000)
61.2%***
(0.000)
40.62%***
(0.000)
64.22%***
(0.000)
66.37%**
(0.028)
52.14%
(0.172)
79.9%***
(0.000)
76.75%
(0.501)
56.89%***
(0.000)
70.01%***
(0.000)
44.14%***
(0.000)
29.41%***
(0.000)
59.36%***
(0.000)
58.57%***
(0.000)
43.73%***
(0.000)
54.16%***
(0.000)

Good
Question
Rate

5.84%

4.55%

13.64%

42.68%

5.84%

43.29%

25.97%

62.8%

39.61%

56.71%

65.58%

52.60%

5.84%

6.49%

7.79%

32.32%

7.79%

46.95%

15.03%

53.66%

28.1%

61.59%

55.19%

42.86%

31.68%

26.71%

7.74%

33.54%

1.3%

38.41%

48.7%

68.9%

37.66%

55.49%

93.17%

58.39%

Table 4. Evaluation result for clarification categories 1a,1c,1p on Pass@1, Test Pass Rate for original problems in HumanEval and
modified problems in HumanEvalComm, communication rate, and Good Question Rate with different models. *p<0.1; **p<=0.05;
***p<0.01

Incompleteness) is applied to the problem. For ChatGPT, among the three clarification types, Incompleteness has the
overall highest communication rate, suppressing the communication rates of Ambiguity and Inconsistency. This means
that Incompleteness is relatively easier to detect and raise than Ambiguity and Inconsistency for models such as ChatGPT,

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 17
DeepSeek Coder, and DeepSeek Chat. Inconsistency has the lowest communication rate among the three types. One
hypothesis to explain that is that Inconsistency requires stronger reasoning capability to detect. Good Question Rate
follows similar patterns as the communication rate, indicating that the quality of questions is proportional to the
communication rate for Code LLMs.
Two exceptions to the above statements are that CodeLlama and CodeQwen1.5 Chat achieved the lowest communication rate in the Incompleteness category than in Ambiguity and Inconsistency. Similar trends can be found in
Good Question Rates. This shows that some Code LLMs such as CodeLlama and CodeQwen1.5 Chat are trained and
designed in a way so that they tend to complete code rather than ask questions even when requirements are incomplete.
This reflects the generative nature of LLMs: given a prompt, the LLM as a generative model essentially generates and
completes text (or code in our scenario) based on the statistical model [61]. Thus, one hypothesis of the low result is
that LLMs have disadvantages due to their generative nature when evaluating communication in coding tasks. This
result also indicates that more intelligent AI agents such as LLM-based agents, where LLM as a generative model is a
component, have the potential to outperform LLMs in the evaluation on communication capability [61].
For the testing performance of the generated code, interestingly, Incompleteness receives overall the lowest Pass@1
(12.8% ∼ 46.95%) and Test Pass Rate (29.41% ∼ 59.36%) for all of the models. One hypothesis is that if no clarifying
questions were asked for problems with Incompleteness, the generated codes would be typically incorrect due to lack of
information. Inconsistency has the highest Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate, because, for problems with Inconsistency, LLMs
are sometimes able to generate correct code without asking clarifying questions. For 1a, 1c, and 1p categories, all except
3 changes in Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate are statistically significant, with p-values less than 0.1.
Breakdown on Categories with Two Clarification Types. Table 5 shows the results breakdown on the clarification
category of 2ac, 2ap, and 2cp, where a combination of two clarification types is applied to the problem. Compared
with applying one clarification type in Table 4, two clarification types have on average slightly higher communication
rates than one clarification type. This makes sense as a combination of two clarification types naturally triggers more
questions than one type. Consequently, we see a similar trend for the Good Question metric.
In terms of testing performance for the combination of two clarification types, both the Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate
decreased significantly from one clarification type to two types. Therefore, compared with one clarification type, a
combination of two clarification types further reduces the Test Pass Rate significantly, but only slightly enlarges the
communication rate and the quality of clarifying questions on average. The slight increase in communication rate is
reasonable given the increased clarification difficulty. The decreased pass rates show that it is hard for the models to get
the necessary requirements for solving the task given the challenging situation for combinations of clarification types.
2cp, with a combination of both Inconsistency and Incompleteness, results in lower Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate compared
with 2ap and 2ac. For 2ac, 2cp, and 2ap categories, 75% of the changes in Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate are statistically
significant since the p-values are less than 0.05 in these changes.

18

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard

Answer to RQ1: More than 60% of responses from Code LLMs still generate code rather than ask questions
when the problem descriptions are manually modified according to different clarification categories. Typically,
the Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate of Code LLMs drop by 35% ∼ 52% and by 17% ∼ 35% respectively, with
statistical significance in each category for over 75% numbers.
Among the three clarification types, the Incompleteness category results in higher communication
rates and Good Question Rates, but lower Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate than the Ambiguity and Inconsistency
categories for Code LLMs. A combination of two clarification types leads to slightly higher communication
rates but much lower Test Pass Rates than one clarification type.

4.2

Comparing Okanagan with Code LLMs in communication skills (RQ2)

Overview. RQ2 aims to compare LLM agent approach, Okanagan, with the current Code LLMs in communication skills.
From Table 3, while the communication rate for ChatGPT is below 20%, the communication rate of Okanagan with
ChatGPT is over 70%, much higher than ChatGPT and all the other models. This shows that changing from LLM to
LLM agent significantly increases the communication rate. For testing performance, Okanagan achieves better results
than all models except CodeQwen1.5 Chat and DeepSeek Coder in both Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate. The trend is similar
for both Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate as mentioned previously. This shows the effectiveness of Okanagan in obtaining
the necessary information by asking clarifying questions.
However, one drawback is that in the original HumanEval, Okanagan achieves a much lower Pass@1 and Test Pass
Rate than ChatGPT. This is because the multi-round structure sometimes asks questions as an initial response even for
original problems, but in original HumanEval, it is expected to directly return code in the initial responses, and evaluation
is conducted on the code in the initial responses. This means for original problems that do not need asking questions,
Okanagan sometimes still asks questions that appear to be unnecessary, since the original problem is known as complete
and has no requirement issue. This is a valid limitation and future work is required (e.g., multi-agent debate [15])
to address this limitation of asking unnecessary questions. If addressed, it indicates much stronger communication
capability as LLM agent knows intelligently when to stop asking [26]. On the other hand, on HumanEvalComm,
Okanagan shows that with LLM agent on top of base LLM (ChatGPT), we can get much better results in all metrics than
ChatGPT. This shows the advantage in communication capability of LLM agent over LLM, as LLM agent can obtain
needed info by asking questions to increase pass rates.
Breakdown on Categories with One Clarification Type. In terms of the results breakdown on the clarification
category of 1a, 1c, and 1p, Okanagan shows a much higher communication rate than any other Code LLMs for 1a, 1c,
and 1p. Incompleteness again has the highest communication rate among the three categories, with a rate of more than
90%. A similar trend holds for Good Question Rate, but DeepSeek Coder and DeepSeek Chat get higher Good Question
Rate than Okanagan in 1a and 1c. Consequently, Okanagan achieves the top three performance for both the highest
Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate among all the models with statistical significance.
Breakdown on Categories with Two Clarification Types. For the results breakdown on the clarification category
of 2ac, 2ap, and 2cp, Okanagan has the highest communication rate among all the models, reaching a high 85% in 2cp
and 94% in 2ap. A similar trend still holds in Good Question Rate. For Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate, Okanagan still ranks

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 19
Clarification
Category

Model
HmEval
ChatGPT

65.79%

CodeLlama

29.63%

CodeQwen1.5 Chat

77.16%

DeepSeek Coder

71.43%

DeepSeek Chat

12.96%

Okanagan

27.15%

ChatGPT

77.42%

CodeLlama

38.24%

CodeQwen1.5 Chat

73.53%

DeepSeek Coder

70.59%

DeepSeek Chat

11.76%

Okanagan

32.26%

ChatGPT

59.42%

CodeLlama

28.38%

CodeQwen1.5 Chat

74.32%

DeepSeek Coder

71.23%

DeepSeek Chat

9.46%

Okanagan

27.94%

2ac

2cp

2ap

Pass@1
Test Pass Rate
Comm.
HmEvalComm HmEval
HmEvalComm Rate
(p-value)
(p-value)
20.39%***
(0.000)
14.2%***
(0.001)
40.12%***
(0.000)
40.74%***
(0.000)
20.99%*
(0.055)
25.66%
(0.769)
15.63%***
(0.000)
14.71%**
(0.028)
38.24%***
(0.003)
29.41%***
(0.000)
26.47%
(0.127)
28.13%
(0.726)
16.67%***
(0.000)
17.57%
(0.120)
28.38%***
(0.000)
36.49%***
(0.000)
24.32%**
(0.016)
29.17%
(0.874)

76.77%
45.65%
84.28%
79.18%
14.03%
33.23%
84.91%
60.9%
83.57%
80.93%
11.76%
34.98%
71.09%
41.59%
82.71%
81.36%
10.9%
34.52%

42.66%***
(0.000)
36.95%*
(0.054)
59.56%***
(0.000)
61.72%***
(0.000)
39.09%***
(0.000)
47.37%***
(0.004)
34.79%***
(0.000)
33.04%***
(0.003)
55.82%***
(0.004)
50.97%***
(0.002)
48.38%***
(0.000)
44.97%
(0.375)
32.39%***
(0.000)
31.27%
(0.135)
44.35%***
(0.000)
48.17%***
(0.000)
35.99%***
(0.000)
43.94%
(0.196)

Good
Question
Rate

5.26%

7.90%

12.5%

42.59%

7.24%

47.53%

26.97%

58.64%

44.08%

64.2%

64.47%

45.39%

6.25%

9.38%

9.68%

29.41%

0%

29.41%

12.9%

52.94%

22.58%

52.94%

84.38%

59.38%

37.50%

29.17%

8.57%

39.19%

1.45%

28.38%

56.52%

70.27%

52.17%

56.76%

94.44%

66.67%

Table 5. Evaluation result for clarification categories 2ac,2cp,2ap on Pass@1, Test Pass Rate for original problems in HumanEval and
modified problems in HumanEvalComm, communication rate, and Good Question Rate with different models. *p<0.1; **p<=0.05;
***p<0.01

at the top 3 in most cases, but the statistical testing shows that most of the p-values are not small enough to show
strong evidence of statistical significance, due to the relative smaller sample size of the categories with two types.

20

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard
Switch Base Model in Okanagan. We also switched base model from using ChatGPT to using another open-sourced

model, DeepSeek Coder, in Okanagan to ensure a fair comparison. The reason we chose DeepSeek Coder is that it is
the best model that achieves the top 4 results on all of the metrics evaluated in Table 3. The result of Okanagan (with
DeepSeek Coder as base) is displayed in Table 3.
For HumanEvalComm dataset, compared with DeepSeek Coder, Okanagan with DeepSeek Coder as base is better
in Communication Rate, similar in Good Question Rate and slightly worse in Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate. After some
investigations, one potential reason of the lower pass rates is that the prompts used in Okanagan framework is suitable
and effective for ChatGPT as base, but not for DeepSeek Coder as base. Because of the prompt issue, the base DeepSeek
Coder sometimes doesn’t follow instruction and ask question within Okanagan. For HumanEval dataset, Okanagan
with DeepSeek Coder as base is worse than DeepSeek Coder. This is similar to Okanagan (with ChatGPT as base)
comparing with ChatGPT, due to the limitation of Okanagan that sometimes asks unnecessary questions, which has
been discussed in the paper.
Comparing Okanagan with ChatGPT as base and DeepSeek Coder as base, Okanagan with DeepSeek Coder as base
is worse in Test Pass rates and Pass@1 for HumanEval and HumanEvalComm, but better in Communication Rate
and Good Question Rate. The former could be because DeepSeek Code as base is less effective than ChatGPT as base
in prompt understanding within Okanagan. The latter could be due to the fact that DeepSeek Coder is better than
ChatGPT in Communication Rate and Good Question Rate.

Answer to RQ2: Okanagan, as a LLM agent approach that uses LLM (specifically ChatGPT), effectively
increases Communication Rate and Good Question Rate by an absolute 58% and 38% respectively, and thus
boosts Pass@1 and Test Pass Rate by an absolute 8% and 7% respectively, when the problem descriptions are
modified based on given clarification categories. However, Okanagan tends to still ask questions that appear
to be unnecessary for original problems that do not need questions. This indicates headroom for achieving
more effective communication capability using LLM agent, and the need to strike a balance between asking
unnecessary questions and truly needed questions.

4.3

Manual Evaluation of LLM-based Evaluator (RQ3)

Overview. We conducted a manual evaluation of LLM-based evaluator to answer RQ3. We recruited six graduate
students at the University of British Columbia to conduct the manual evaluation. The 6 students are from the software
engineering lab in the computer science department, all having at least two years of professional software development
background. We asked the students to manually assess the results of LLM-based evaluator and manually mark the
quality of models’ responses within one week.
Manual Evaluation Setup. We selected a subset of problem samples in HumanEvalComm using representative
sample size. We have around 4300 samples in total (for 6 models) available for manual evaluation. However, as manual
evaluation is time-consuming for the recruited students, we used sample size calculator to select 60 samples for each
model, which is statistically representing our population size. In the sample size calculator, we set Confidence Level as
95%, Margin of Error as 5%, and Population Proportion as 50%. We used a hash function to sample 60 problems from
HumanEvalComm for each of the 6 models, and created a guideline, with examples detailing the instructions for the
students to do the manual evaluation. To avoid introducing bias, we hide the actual names of the 6 models and used

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 21
model

Good Answer Rate
(questions)

Acceptable Answer
Rate (questions)

False Recovery Rate
(non-questions)

Kappa
𝜅

ChatGPT
CodeLlama
CodeQwen1.5 Chat
DeepSeek Coder
DeepSeek Chat
Okanagan

50.0%
100%
100%
69.2%
41.91%
31.5%

50.0%
100%
100%
100%
59.0%
53.3%

0.94%
32.5%
40.7%
38.0%
34.8%
0%

0.85
0.96
0.72
0.92
0.77
0.77

Table 6. Metrics from Manual Evaluation for Answers from LLM-based Evaluator To Models’ Response. Each row shows different
metrics for LLevaluator’s answers to the model’s responses, with the Kappa (𝜅) value.

model 1 to model 6 instead of actual model names. For each sample of a give model, we asked two students to do the
labels independently. The goal is to conduct human evaluation to evaluate the quality of clarifying questions from
models (i.e., is question asked or not, what’s the question quality) and answers from our LLM evaluator to answer the
questions (i.e., what’s the answer quality). Concretely, the tasks we asked the students to rate for each sample is the
following:
• Question or Not: The students were assigned to assess is question asked or not by the model given the problem
description. The labels are 1: Yes, 0: No.
• Question Quality: We then asked students to label the quality of questions. Similar to the ones in Good
Question Rate, the labels are 3: Good (The model asks clarifying questions that help recover the missing info), 2:
Fair (The model asks OK, reasonable clarifying questions, but the questions may not cover the missing info),
1: Bad (The model asks no questions or completely irrelevant questions that do not help at all to recover the
missing/clarifying information).
• Answer Quality: We asked students to also label the quality of answers to the questions. The labels are 3:
Good (The answer recovers the missing info), 2: Fair (The answer is OK and reasonable, but may not recover
the missing info), 1: Bad (The answer does not make sense at all), -1: False Recovery (The answer recovers the
missing info, although ‘response’ doesn’t have questions), 0: No Recovery (The answer does not recover the
missing info if ‘response’ doesn’t have questions. Note that 1,2 or 3 is selected if the model ‘response’ does have
questions, otherwise, -1 or 0 is selected.)
We then converted the above labels to 4 metrics and reported them:
• Communication Rate: The percentage of model responses that ask clarifying questions.
• Good Question Rate: The percentage of model responses asking questions with Good question quality label
(3).
• Good Answer Rate (questions): The percentage of model’s Good answer to questions, where the answer has
a Good (3) answer quality label. This is for model responses that are questions.
• Acceptable Answer Rate (questions): The percentage of model asking questions with Good (3) and Fair (2)
question quality label. This is for model responses that are questions.
• False Recovery Rate (non-questions): For model responses that do not have questions, False Recovery Rate
is the percentage of the answers that recovers the missing info among all the answers to model responses that

22

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard
do not have questions. Ideally, if the model responds with non-questions, we don’t want to provide answer that
recovers the missing info, and thus falsely increases the test pass rates and Pass@1 in our evaluation.
Manual Evaluation Results. Table 6 shows the comparison of the performance of the LLM-based evaluator’s

answers to various models across three metrics: Good Answer Rate, Acceptable Answer Rate, and False Recovery Rate,
along with their inter-rater reliability represented by Cohen’s Kappa 𝜅. the results of each metric from the recruited
students. Note that each result has two student raters, so the average and the Kappa are reported in the three rates
columns and Kappa column respectively. The Kappa is between 0.7-1.0 for all the rows in the result, indicating that two
raters reach substantial or near-perfect agreements. Overall, all the models show at least over 50% Acceptable Answer
Rate. All models except DeepSeek Chat and Okanagan also show over 50% Good Answer Rate. This illustrates the
LLM-based evaluator’s ability to provide correct or acceptable answers to the questions posed by different models. In
terms of False Recovery Rate, ChatGPT and Okanagan show low False Recovery Rates, with 0.94% and 0%, respectively,
but the other models show higher False Recovery Rates, between 30% and 40%. This indicates the potential risk for
those models that the increased test pass rates may not be contributed from the model’s ability to ask questions. Future
work should be spent on further reducing the False Recovery Rates as much as possible.

Fig. 5. Comparison of Comm. Rate and Good Question Rate between Manual Evaluation and Automated Evaluation Across Models.
Each row shows the resulting percentage of a model on a particular metric followed by the Kappa (𝜅) value in parentheses.

Comparing metrics between Automated and Manual Evaluation. To measure the reliance of the metrics
used in our evaluation, we further compared the difference between the metrics in our automated evaluation and the
same metrics obtained from the manual evaluation. We calculated the automated metrics, Communication Rates and
Good Question Rate, on the same data we used for the manual evaluation. Figure 5 shows the direct comparison of
Communication Rate and Good Question Rate between manual and automated evaluation, respectively. For manual
metrics, as aforementioned, the average of two student raters and the Kappa are reported in Figure 5.
For communication rate, the automated metrics align well in general with the manual metrics across different models,
with a difference of less than 10%. The alignment is excellent for ChatGPT, Okanagan, CodQwen1.5 Chat with less than
3% difference. On the other hand, there appear to be discrepancies in Good Question Rate, especially for models such as
CodeLlama, CodeQwen1.5 Chat, and DeepSeek Coder. This could be due to differences in the criteria used by humans

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 23
and automated systems to judge questions as “good”. The recruited students have a clearer and higher bar to determine
a “good” question, while the automated LLM-based evaluator tends to label more good questions that should have been
labelled fair/bad questions.

Answer to RQ3: The LLM-based evaluator provides acceptable answers to models’ responses, with higher
than 50% Acceptable Answer Rate for all models and Good Answer Rate for most models. False Recovery
Rates need to be further reduced for some models to ensure the reliability of test pass rates and Pass@1. The
Communication Rate in automated evaluation aligns reasonably well with the manual evaluation, but for the
Good Question Rate, LLM-based evaluator tends to mark more “Good” questions than it should. Overall, the
two metrics can provide useful insights to guide our experiment, but they may not always align with human
judgment, particularly for subjective criteria like Good Question Rate.

4.4

Investigating Different Impacts of Prompt Strategies and Hyperparameters (RQ4)

4.4.1 Investigating Different Extent of Incomplete Modification (1p). To dig deeper into the results of incomplete
modification (1p), we did further investigations to understand the corresponding results for different ratio of removed
content in the problem description of 1p. We investigated the results by removing a random text block in the problem
descriptions. Specifically, for each problem description in words, we randomly remove a list of consecutive words where
the size of the list is 𝑋 percentage of the total number of words in the problem description. We empirically choose
the values 𝑋 = 30%, 50%, 90% in this experiment. Table 10 shows an example of problem descriptions with different 𝑋 .
We can see that even when 𝑋 is as small as 30%, it would be ideal for LLM to ask questions to get the missing piece
of information to ensure the LLM fully understands the problem and generates high-quality code. When 𝑋 becomes
larger, such as 90%, the problem description becomes almost impossible to conduct the code generation task with high
accuracy.
To mitigate the risk of randomness in this investigation, for each problem, we ran the experiment 5 times, and
reported the metrics used in [50], including Mean, Variance, Max Diff, and Ratio of Worst. We calculated the mean
and variance of the 5 Test Pass Rates and communication rates for each problem, and reported the average among
all problems, as Mean and Variance. The Max Diff is the maximum value of the maximum diff among all problems.
“Ratio of Worst (Cases)” is the ratio of problems with the maximum diff of test pass rate being 1. Please refer to [50] for
complete descriptions of these metrics. We report the Test Pass Rates and communication rates in Table 7 based on the
percentage of removed descriptions (0%, 30%, 50%, and 90%). We used ChatGPT 3.5 as the model in the investigation.
We can see that, in terms of Test Pass Rates, as the percentage of removed information increases, there is a noticeable
decrease in the mean Test Pass Rate, indicating that incomplete problem descriptions negatively affect the ability to
pass tests. This trend is further supported by the variance and maximum difference metrics, which show increasing
variability and differences in Test Pass Rates as information is removed. The ratio of the worst case also suggests that a
higher percentage of removed information leads to a lower Test Pass Rate.
For communication rates, incomplete problem descriptions lead to an increase in the mean communication rate as
the percentage of removed information increases. This is expected because when there is more missing information,
LLM tends to ask more questions rather than directly generating code. The variance and maximum difference metrics
also reflect higher variability and differences in communication rates with incomplete problem descriptions. The ratio

24

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard

of the worst case indicates that a higher percentage of removed information results in a more significant increase in
communication rates. Figure 6 shows a visual comparison of these two metrics using numbers from Table 7 when
different X% of content is removed in the problem description. This shows visually that LLM tends to ask more questions
as more content in the description is removed, but this starts to happen only after half of the descriptions are removed.
When 90% of the description is removed, LLM asks questions for only 54% of problem descriptions. To summarize, 95%
of responses from Code LLMs still generate code even when 50% of problem descriptions are randomly removed. When
the removed percentage of description increases to 90%, 46% of responses from Code LLMs still generate code. This
shows a rather weak ability of Code LLMs to ask clarifying questions when information is randomly removed and
therefore indicates plenty of research opportunities in pushing the curves of LLM or LLM agent toward the human
software engineers.

Fig. 6. The chart of communication rate and Test Pass Rate when different X% of content is removed in the problem description.

4.4.2 Investigating Different Hyperparameters. To evaluate the impact of the hyperparameter in the experiments, we
also investigated using different temperatures as the hyperparameter of ChatGPT. Temperature is a hyperparameter
that controls the randomness of ChatGPT-generated text. The default temperature of ChatGPT is 1.0 and we tested the
result of using temperature as 0, 1.0, 2.0. Same as in the previous incomplete modification investigation, we ran the
experiment 5 times and checked the metrics including mean and variance. We ran with the percentage of removed
information being 50%.
Table 8 presents results on the impact of the temperature hyperparameter in ChatGPT in HumanEvalComm. We
found that the mean Test Pass Rate dropped from 49.6% (variance=0.088, max diff=0.523, ratio of worst=0.390) to 40.7%
(variance=max diff=ratio of worst=0), and the communication rate changed from 1.8% (variance=0.011,max diff=0.067,
ratio of worst=0.067) to 3.7% (variance=max diff=ratio of worst=0) when the temperature changed from 1 to 0. We
also tested 2.0 as temperature, but found that most of these requests timed out due to longer processing time on the
OpenAI server end due to high temperature. We can see that the variance, max diff, and ratio of worst become 0
when the temperature is 0. This means lower temperature does indicate much more deterministic and focused results.
Interestingly, as the temperature dropped from 1 to 0, the mean Test Pass Rate dropped, but the communication rate
increased. This could be because lower temperature leads to less creative and diverse output to “guess” the code,
therefore somehow forcing the model to ask questions to seek additional information. Given the temperature of 1.0 is
the default setting, and the results do not show a significant impact of varying temperature, in the evaluation, we use
the temperature of 1.0 for both ChatGPT and Okanagan.

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 25
% Removed

Metric

Mean

Variance

Max Diff

Ratio of Worst

0%

Test Pass Rate

66.5%

0.122

0.690

0.561

0%

Communication Rate

3.3%

0.019

0.110

0.110

30%

Test Pass Rate

49.6%

0.088

0.532

0.390

30%

Communication Rate

1.8%

0.011

0.067

0.067

50%

Test Pass Rate

41.1%

0.085

0.523

0.317

50%

Communication Rate

5.5%

0.028

0.165

0.165

90%

Test Pass Rate

44.8%

0.124

0.684

0.543

90%

Communication Rate

54.1%

0.120

0.604

0.604

Table 7. Results on the average values of Test Pass Rates and communication rates with different percentages of content removed in
the problem descriptions. Due to the randomness involved, the experiment was run 5 times and metrics used in [50] were reported.

% Removed

Temperature

Category

Mean

Variance

Max Diff

Ratio of Worst

50%

1

Test Pass Rate

0.496

0.088

0.532

0.390

50%

1

Communication Rate

0.018

0.011

0.067

0.067

50%

0

Test Pass Rate

0.407

0

0

0

50%

0

Communication Rate

0.037

0

0

0

Table 8. Results on the average values of test pass rates and communication rates with different temperatures as the hyperparameter
of LLM in HumanEvalComm.

4.4.3 Investigating Different Prompts. To evaluate the impact of prompt engineering, we evaluated the results using
different prompt templates and strategies. Table 14 and Table 16 in Appendix shows different prompt templates in
HumanEvalComm evaluation and Okanagan, respectively. We designed the experiments to make prompt variants for
two major prompts in the evaluation: 1) the initial prompt (first row in Table 14) to prompt the model to either ask
question or generate code, and 2) the prompt for LLM-based evaluator (second row in Table 14) to provide answer to
model’s questions. The prompt variants are displayed in Table 15.
Table 9 shows the results of different prompt variants in the evaluation. We chose ChatGPT as a representative
model from LLM, and Okanagan from LLM agent. Based on the results, we can see that when using 1st prompt variant
and 1st prompt one-shot, the Good Question Rate is affected, with 22% absolute increase for ChatGPT and -3% decrease
for Okanagan. This shows that Good Question Rate can be easily affected by prompt engineering, which aligns with our
finding on the unreliability of this metric in RQ3. On the other hand, the impact of these prompt variants are less severe,
typically within 10%, in Communication Rate (-2% to +13%), Pass@1 (0% to +9%) and Test Pass Rate (+2% to +11%).
Hence, future work should focus on how to reduce the impact of prompt engineering for this type of evaluation. We did
not run the experiments for the prompt variant and one-shot prompt variant for the LLM-based evaluator prompt due
to cost limitation based on our experiments in the first prompt variants.

26

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard
Prompt

Model

Comm. Rate

Good Question
Rate

Pass@1

Test Pass Rate

Original
Prompt
1st Prompt
Variant
1st Prompt
One-Shot
Original
Prompt
1st Prompt
One-Shot

ChatGPT

14.21%

13.43%

31.34%

49.39%

ChatGPT

27.24% (+13.03%)

36.19% (+22.76%)

41.12% (+9.78%)

60.45% (+11.06%)

ChatGPT

17.68% (+3.47%)

36.13% (+22.70%)

38.84% (+7.50%)

58.61% (+9.22%)

Okanagan

72.73%

52.24%

39.62%

56.98%

Okanagan

70.56% (-2.17%)

48.77% (-3.47%)

40.34% (+0.72%)

59.38% (+2.40%)

Table 9. Results of Different Prompt Variants for the 1st Prompt in Evaluation for Selected Models. Each row shows the resulting
metrics of a model for evaluation metrics.

% Removed in
Description

Example Problem Description

0%

def encode_cyclic(s: str): returns encoded string by cycling
groups of three characters. # split string to groups. Each of
length 3. groups = [s[(3 * i):min((3 * i + 3), len(s))] for i in
range((len(s) + 2) // 3)] # cycle elements in each group. Unless group has fewer elements than 3. groups = [(group[1:] +
group[0]) if len(group) == 3 else group for group in groups]
return "".join(groups) def decode_cyclic(s: str): takes as input
string encoded with encode_cyclic function. Returns decoded
string.

30%

def encode_cyclic(s: str): returns encoded string by cycling
groups of three characters. split string to in each group. Unless group has fewer elements than 3. groups = [(group[1:] +
group[0]) if len(group) == 3 else group for group in groups]
return "".join(groups) def decode_cyclic(s: str): takes as input
string encoded with encode_cyclic function. Returns decoded
string.

50%

def encode _cyclic(s: str): returns encoded string by cycling
groups of three characters. split string to groups. Each of length
3. groups = [s[(3 * i):min((3 * i + takes as input string encoded
with encode_cyclic function. Returns decoded string.

90%

def encode_cyclic(s: str): encode_cyclic function. Returns decoded string.

Table 10. Example of randomly removing parts of the problem description from problem number 38 of HumanEval.

Answer to RQ4: while LLMs begin to ask more clarifying questions after 50% of the description is removed,
even with 90% removed, only 54% of responses from LLMs asked questions. Variations in temperature hyperparameter did not significantly affect performance. On the other hand, prompt engineering has a larger
impact on Good Question Rate, but less impact (within 10% absolute change) on Communication Rate, Pass@1
and Test Pass Rate.

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 27
1st Model Input

You are an expert software developer who writes high-quality code. With below
information, please either generate Python3 code (Respond directly with code
only with markdown), or ask clarifying questions:
def how_many_times ( string : str , substring : str ) - > int :
"""
Find how many times a given substring can be found
in the original string .
"""

1st Model Response

Sure, I can help you with that. However, I need more information to provide
a precise solution. Could you please provide the following details? 1. What
should be the behavior if the substring is not found in the string? 2. What
should be the behavior if the substring is an empty string? 3. Are there any
specific constraints or requirements you would like to consider? With these
details, I can provide a more accurate solution.

LLM-based Evaluator
Output

Answer to Questions: 1. If the substring is not found in the string, the function
should return 0. 2. If the substring is an empty string, the function should return
0. 3. There are no specific constraints or requirements other than counting the
overlapping cases.

2nd Model Input

[1st Model Input][1st Model Response][Answer to Questions]... Given the above
conversations, generate Python code directly (Markdown) to solve the coding
problem:

2nd Model Response

Sure, based on the provided information, here is a Python function that should
solve the problem:
def how_many_times ( string : str , substring : str ) - > int :
"""
Count the number of non - overlapping occurrences of a
substring in a string .
Parameters :
string ( str ) : The string to search within .
substring ( str ) : The substring to search for .
Returns :
int : The number of times the substring occurs in the
string , or 0 if the substring is empty .
"""
if not substring :
return 0
count = 0
start = 0
while start < len ( string ) :
pos = string . find ( substring , start )
if pos ! = - 1 :
count + = 1
# Ensure non - overlapping occurrences
start = pos + len ( substring )
else :
break
return count

Table 11. Example case for DeepSeek Coder in problem 18 of HumanEvalComm. The clarification type of this problem is 1p
(Incompleteness). The communication rate is 100%, the Good Question Rate is Good, and Test Pass Rate is 100% for this example.

28

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard

1st Model Input

You are an expert software developer who writes high quality code. With below information, please either generate Python3 code (Respond directly with code only with
markdown), or ask clarifying questions:
def triangle_area (a , h ) :
""" Given length of a side and high return area for a triangle .
>>> triangle_area (5 , 3 )
15
"""

1st Model Response

Here is the Python code for the function “triangle_area”:
def triangle_area (a , h ) :
return ( a * h ) / 2

This function takes two arguments, “a” and “h”, which represent the length of a side
and the height of a triangle, respectively. It returns the area of the triangle, which is
calculated by multiplying the length of the side by the height and then dividing by 2.
Here is an example of how to use the function:
print ( triangle_area (5 , 3 ) )

# Output : 15

This will print the area of a triangle with a side length of 5 and a height of 3, which is
15.
LLM-based Evaluator Output

Answer to Questions: N/A

2nd Model Input

[1st Model Input][1st Model Response][Answer to Questions]... Given the above conversations, generate Python code directly (Markdown) to solve the coding problem:

2nd Model Response

Given the conversations, here is the Python code to solve the coding problem:
def triangle_area (a , h ) :
return ( a * h ) / 2
print ( triangle_area (5 , 3 ) )

# Output : 15

This code defines a function “triangle_area” that takes two arguments, “a” and “h”,
which represent the length of a side and the height of a triangle, respectively. The
function returns the area of the triangle, which is calculated by multiplying the length
of the side by the height and then dividing by 2.
The code also includes a call to the “triangle_area” function with the arguments “5”
and “3”, which prints the area of the triangle, which is ‘15’.
Table 12. Example case for CodeLlama in problem 45 of HumanEvalComm. The clarification type of this problem is 1c (Inconsistency).
The communication rate is 100% given both code block and text are returned rather than code block only. The Good Question Rate is
Bad, indicating no clarifying questions are detected.

5

DISCUSSION
In this section, we provide some example cases to understand the results of Code LLMs and Okanagan. Then we

also add discussions on 1) why not using automated modification, and 2) how does LLM-based evaluator impact the
evaluation results. Finally, we share the implications and future work of this study.

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 29
5.1

Example Cases

Besides the numeric results, we also study two cases to better understand the evaluation steps. Table 11 illustrates the
result for a successful example problem (HumanEval/18) in HumanEvalComm. The clarification type of this problem
is 1p (Incompleteness), so the requirement of “Count overlapping cases.” is missing in the problem description. Given
this 1st model input, DeepSeek Coder was able to detect the incomplete requirement in the problem and ask clarifying
questions rather than generating code directly. Therefore, the communication rate is 100% for this single case. With the
1st model input and response, the LLM-based evaluator outputs the Good Question Rate of Good for our evaluation
and answers to the clarifying questions. This answer provides the missing requirement of “counting overlapping cases”
from the original problem.
In the 2nd model input, the model is given the previous conversations, including the 1st model input, 1st model
response (clarifying questions), and the answer from the LLM-based evaluator to the clarifying questions. With the
requirement of “counting overlapping cases”, the model correctly solved the problem with 100% Test Pass Rate. Note
that we can again let the model either ask questions or generate code, same as the instruction in the 1st model input,
but we chose to perform only one question-answer round for simplicity of our evaluation.
Another case is shown in Table 12 for another example problem (HumanEval/45) in HumanEvalComm using
CodeLlama. The clarification type of this problem is 1c (Inconsistency): in the test case, triangle_area (5, 3) returns 15
instead of 7.5. This causes Inconsistency between the test case and the problem description. Given the 1st model input,
CodeLlama did not return a code block only according to the instruction, but a mix of code block and text explanation.
Therefore, the communication rate is 100% for this case, but the LLM-based evaluator outputs the Good Question
Rate of 1 (No questions). In this case, the Inconsistency issue was not captured and no clarifying questions were asked.
For the evaluation metrics, the Good Question Rate of Bad successfully punished this case, but Test Pass Rate and
communication rate failed to capture and punish the issue.

5.2

Why not Automated Modification?

A natural question is that whether it’s possible to use automated modification instead of manual modification which
requires efforts to hand-craft a dataset. Before we started manual modification, it should be noted that we tried to
use LLM to modify the problem description, but we found that the modification by LLMs did not meet our standard.
Specifically, the modification from using LLMs cannot guarantee that the modification will trigger clarifying questions.
Similar limitations on using LLMs for Requirement Engineering have been also reported in [4].
We designed a prompt that generated auto-modified problems for all of 164 problems in HumanEval. We have
uploaded the results for the 164 problems in HumanEval at this link. Table 13 show the result of two examples. We can
see that in the first example, “a positive floating point number” is changed to “a number”, with the intention to make
the problem ambiguous. Although this modification is made, it does not trigger clarifying questions be- fore generating
correct code, which is required for crafting modified problems in this study. In the second example, a new test case is
added to make the problem inconsistent, but this modification does not create any conflict or inconsistency. Hence, we
chose to manually modify all of the problem descriptions to provide this guarantee for HumanEvalComm.
5.3

How does LLM-based Evaluator Impact Results of Okanagan and Other Models?

30

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard
We further discuss about some models that get higher rates than Okanagan in metrics such as pass rates and Good

Question Rates in Table 3, from the LLM-based evaluator perspective. For Good Question Rate, DeepSeek Coder and
DeepSeek Chat get comparable or higher rates than Okanagan with ChatGPT (or DeepSeek Code) as base. One potential
cause of this is because the LLM-based evaluator tends to mark more “Good” questions than it should for DeepSeek
Coder and DeepSeek Chat, as illustrated in Figure 5. For Test Pass Rate and Pass@1, CodeQwen 1.5 Chat and DeepSeek
Coder achieve better results than Okanagan with ChatGPT (or DeepSeek Code) as base. One of the contributors is that
False Recovery Rate for CodeQwen 1.5 Chat and DeepSeek Coder is much higher than Okanagan. This could cause the
issue that even though CodeQwen 1.5 Chat and DeepSeek Coder do not ask any relevant questions, the evaluator still
sends them relevant information that results in higher Test Pass Rate and Pass@1. Future work is needed to reduce the
bias introduced by LLM-based evaluator.
5.4

How does other LLM-based Agent work?

To enable a more complete comparison, we implemented and evaluated AgentCoder [29]. AgentCoder [29] is one of
the leading agent-based code generation pipelines, with reported pass@1 scores on the HumanEval benchmark of 96.3
using GPT4 and 79.9 using chatGPT, making it ideal for use as a baseline for this reasearch.
In implementation, we made some code changes in AgentCoder to make it work for our scenario in HumanEvalComm.
In round 1 of our evaluation, we ran AgentCoder, asking the model to either generate code or clarifying questions. For
this step, we had to change the functioning of AgentCoder. Originally made to run on the HumanEval dataset, we
run AgentCoder on the new HumanEvalComm dataset, which has modified prompts asking the model to generate
clarifying questions. Due to this, for round 1, we use only programmer component from AgentCoder since the response
is not limited to code but to clarifying questions. This leads to the generation of a completion list that contains either
clarifying questions or code. For round 2, we generate answers to these questions. For round 3, we run the entirety
of AgentCoder, with all the context from the previous two rounds. We published our implementation to our github
repo in this link that includes the details about our implementation and changes made. However, we found that
none (0%) of AgentCoder’s responses asks clarifying questions, although we tried our best to adapt AgentCoder for
HumanEvalComm that generates code with clarifying questions. This shows the LLM agents usually have specialized
and customized tasks, thus making it difficult to be directly adapted for our task of asking clarifying questions in
HumanEvalComm. Future work is needed to more easily adapt LLM agent methods in similar benchmarks.
5.5

Limitations

We have done our best to conduct evaluations of different models in our work. However, we have also identified a
few limitations throughout this research. The limitations are summarized as follows.
High demand for human resources in modifications. As mentioned in Section 5.2, using automated techniques
has a much lower quality than human-curated approach. Therefore, to ensure the highest possible standard for
HumanEvalComm dataset, we chose to manually curate the dataset. However, this manual process of modifying
problem descriptions across various categories requires significant labor costs and a heavy reliance on human expertise,
which can be particularly challenging for research environments with limited resources. Relying on experienced software
engineers to review and modify each problem significantly increases the costs and duration of research. It is worth
mentioning that other researchers do not require manual effort to use HumanEvalComm. So, the resource-constraint
research groups can just use our benchmark as-is for testing their models.

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 31
Subjectivity in manually modified problems. While manual modification was necessary to ensure the modifications would trigger clarifying questions, different engineers might approach the same problem differently. Although we
have used specific guidelines to modify the problem sets as mentioned in Section 2, given the vast potential space for
modifications, the subjectivity of engineers may still affect the quality and standardization of the modified problems in
HumanEvalComm.
Okanagan tends to ask unnecessary questions. While Okanagan demonstrated improved communication rates
and code generation performance for modified problems, it sometimes asked unnecessary questions for original problems
that did not require clarification. Ideally, a perfect model should intelligently determine when to ask questions and
when to refrain from doing so, but there is a gap between this ideal behavior and the performance of all evaluated
models, including Okanagan.
Potential bias introduced by LLM-based evaluator. This study employed an LLM-based evaluator to assess the
quality of clarifying questions generated by the models and to generate answers to those questions. While this approach
proved useful, it also introduced several limitations that potentially impacted the generalizability of the results:
• Discrepancies existed between the Good Question Rate as determined by the automated evaluator and the
manual evaluation performed by human annotators. The LLM-based evaluator tended to mark more questions
as “Good” than the human annotators. This means that the evaluator might have overestimated the quality of
clarifying questions in some cases. For example, it sometimes assigned “Good” question quality labels even
when the models did not ask any clarifying questions. In terms of evaluation results, Good Question Rate
can provide useful insights, but they may not always align with human judgment due to the potential bias of
evaluator.
• Good Question Rates are more easily affected by different prompt variants due to the evaluator. This aligns
with our finding of discrepancies in Good Question Rate in RQ3. Thus, regarding the evaluation result, Good
Question Rates are more vulnerable to prompt engineering, indicating the unreliability of this metric.
• The False Recovery Rate for some models, such as CodeQwen1.5 Chat and DeepSeek Coder, was notably higher
compared to Okanagan. This indicates that the evaluator sometimes provided relevant information to these
models even when they did not ask any relevant clarifying questions. Consequently, this may have artificially
inflated their Test Pass Rates and Pass@1 scores, complicating the assessment of their communication skills via
these metrics.

6

IMPLICATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Based on the results and analysis, we summarized the following implications as suggestions for future work:
• Develop better evaluation methods for communication ability in coding tasks. Our main contribution is
the new HumanEvalComm benchmark in evaluating LLMs and LLM agents on the communication aspect when
the models are assigned coding tasks, but future research is needed to improve the evaluation. This includes
(1) Exploring automated or semi-automated techniques to reduce reliance on human resources, making the
method more accessible to resource-constrained environments.
(2) Addressing biases in LLM-based evaluators, such as adopting approaches like the FM/LLM Jury [38].
(3) Enhancing the accuracy and fairness of evaluation metrics to better measure and understand communication
capabilities.

32

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard
Prompt Template
Based on the knowledge that ambiguous problem
descriptions can be created by introducing multiple
valid interpretations or unspecified details, think
step-by-step to rewrite the given coding problem
description and make it ambiguous. Only output the
modified problem description itself.
Original Problem Description:
def truncate_number ( number : float ) ->
float :
""" Given a positive floating point
number , it can be decomposed
into
an integer part ( largest integer
smaller than given number ) and
decimals
( leftover part always smaller than
1) .
Return the decimal part of the
number .
>>> truncate_number (3.5)
0.5
"""

Ambiguous Problem:
Based on the knowledge that a problem becomes
inconsistent if some statements in the description
show conflict, think step-by-step to rewrite the given
coding problem description and make it inconsistent.
Only output the modified problem description itself.
Original Problem Description:
from typing import List
def filter_by_substring ( strings : List [
str ] , substring : str ) -> List [ str ]:
""" Filter an input list of strings
only for ones that contain
given substring
>>> filter_by_substring ([] , 'a ')
[]
>>> filter_by_substring ([ ' abc ', '
bacd ', ' cde ', ' array '] , 'a ')
[' abc ', ' bacd ', ' array ']
"""

Inconsistent Problem:

Output (Auto-Modified Problem)
def truncate_number ( number : float ) ->
float :
""" Given a number , it can be
decomposed into an integer
part ( largest integer smaller
than given number ) and
decimals
( leftover part always smaller than
1) .
Return the decimal part of the
number .
>>> truncate_number (3.5)
0.5
"""

(Interpretation: “a positive floating point number” is
changed to “a number”, with the intention to make
the problem ambiguous. Although this modification
is made, it doesn’t trigger clarifying questions before generating correct code, which is required for
crafting modified problems in this study.)

from typing import List
def filter_by_substring ( strings : List [
str ] , substring : str ) -> List [ str
]:
""" Filter an input list of
strings only for ones that
contain given substring
>>> filter_by_substring ([] , 'a ')
[]
>>> filter_by_substring ([ ' abc ', '
bacd ', ' cde ', ' array '] , 'a ')
[' abc ', ' bacd ', ' array ']
>>> filter_by_substring ([ ' abc ', '
bacd ', ' cde ', ' array '] , 'b ')
[' abc ', ' bacd ']
"""

(Interpretation: a new test example is added to make
the problem inconsistent, but this modification does
not create any conflict or inconsistency.)

Table 13. Automatically modified problems using a LLM. Given a problem description from the HumanEval dataset, we used Google
Gemini as the LLM to modify the problem description so that the modified problem is ambiguous, inconsistent, or incomplete.

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 33
(4) Creating diverse datasets with varying levels of clarification difficulty to more comprehensively assess the
communication skills of models.
We believe this is an important angle in evaluation as more and more models in agentic flow and LLMs are
starting to emerge for software engineering tasks in the near future.
• Move beyond the limitations of generative models. In the evaluation, we found that for Incompleteness
category, some Code LLMs have extremely low results, potentially due to their generative nature that prefers to
generate and complete code based on a statistical model, even when the description is obviously incomplete.
Future work should go beyond the generative nature of LLMs to “AI agent” or “AI assistants” [26] to further
enhance communication capabilities.
• Enhance reasoning capability and information-gathering capabilities. In the evaluation, Inconsistency
category has the lowest communication rate among the three types. This indicates that more future work is
needed to develop models with stronger reasoning capability to address the low performance in Inconsistency
category. Separately, from the RQ1 results in Table 5 and RQ4 results of different incomplete modifications
in Section 4.4.1, we noticed reduced Pass@1 and Test Pass Rates as the difficulty increases in the problem
description. This potentially indicates a bottleneck in failing to fetch needed information for solving the coding
tasks, particularly for more complex problem descriptions. Future work should focus on both model and
evaluation setup to increase the model’s ability to reason about the problem description and to get necessary
information in challenging situations and real-world environments.
• Improve the ability to determine when to stop asking questions. Although the LLM agent approach,
Okanagan, showed promising initial results in improving the metrics in the evaluation, one limitation of
Okanagan is that it reduced the pass rates in the original HumanEval benchmark, due to asking unnecessary
questions. Therefore, one future work in LLM agents is to address this shortcoming. This will potentially lead
to much stronger communication capability as the model will know intelligently when to avoid redundant or
irrelevant inquiries.
7

THREATS TO VALIDITY

Construct validity. This threat relates to the potential incorrectness in manual modifications of problems in HumanEvalComm. To mitigate this threat, we have manually checked and verified all of the problems more than three
times, and each time they discussed the problems they didn’t reach a consensus. Although we have tried our best efforts,
there still may be some corner cases where 1) the modified problems do not match the definition of Ambiguity and
Inconsistency, and 2) the modified problems suffer from subjective variations and are not consistent with other problems.
Internal validity. This threat relates to the internal parameters such as the parameters in open-source Code LLMs
and ChatGPT that could potentially affect the results. To mitigate this threat, we use most of the default parameters
when running open-source Code LLMs and ChatGPT. For open-source models, we set max_new_tokens as 512 to save
computing resources and used default values for other parameters. For ChatGPT, we used temperature as 1.0 and 𝑛 as 1
in the OpenAI API. Another threat relates to the effectiveness of the LLM-based evaluator used in the evaluation. As
mentioned previously, to mitigate this issue, we have optimized the prompt for the LLM-based evaluator several times
and checked the results manually. Besides, the LLM-based evaluator is used equally for all models in the evaluation, so
this threat does not affect the relative ranking of the results for all models.
External validity. This relates to the generality of the communication capability of the models on other benchmarks.
To mitigate this issue, we extensively report and analyze the results with statistical testing that reports p-value. To

34

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard

reduce the risk introduced by randomness in our investigation, we also added metrics such as mean, variance, max diff
in the results. Thus, these results can be potentially adapted for other datasets. However, since we have not tested this,
we cannot make a sound claim regarding the communication capability of the models on another dataset. Another
threat is related to the implementation of evaluated models. We directly call OpenAI API to get ChatGPT results. We
implemented Okanagan in Python that calls OpenAI API. For CodeLlama and other open-source models, we downloaded
the model from HuggingFace and perform model inference on UBC ARC Sockeye. From the evaluation results, we
believe that our implementation reflects the original methods. Another threat concerns the generality and reliability of
the metrics we used in our evaluations. To address this, we have added RQ3 to conduct manual evaluation and use its
result to compare with the proposed metrics. We have also discussed the potential impact of LLM-based evaluator on
the reliability of the metrics. To ensure the reproducibility of the evaluation results, we report the result of the case
study extensively and release our complete code and dataset. This can allow other researchers to reproduce and extend
our experiments in the case study.

8

RELATED WORK

Code Generation with Large Language Models. In recent years, the field of code generation has seen a significant
shift with the large language models. For example, Codex [13], fine-tuned on GPT-3 [11] on a large corpus of source code
data, is capable of generating code for 47/164 problems in the HumanEval dataset in a single run, a benchmark for code
generation task. Codex became the core model for the Copilot [92], an AI-powered coding assistant developed by GitHub.
After Codex, a couple of models similar to Codex but with smaller size were then developed, including GPT-J [71],
CodeParrot [17], PolyCoder [80]. AlphaCode [39], with size comparable to Codex, was trained on Github data and
fine-tuned on competition-level programming problems. It exceeded half of the competitors in coding competitions
of CodeForces, a well-known online competitive programming platform. CodeGen [48] was trained on both natural
language and programming language data for code generations with multi-turn prompts. Recently, newer models
such as CodeLlama [57], DeepSeek Coder [24] and CodeQwen1.5 Chat [6] continued to achieve higher performance in
benchmark such as HumanEval. However, the level of communication skills of these models is not emphasized and
evaluated. These models are evaluated by generating code in one or multiple attempts from one-off problem descriptions,
without further information from conversations. Therefore, when the input problem description is error-prone or
incomplete, the model still has to generate the code without the chance to clarify critical questions. Our work serves as
an exploration to address this usability problem.
Self-Correct LLMs and LLM Agent in AI. Recently, a promising approach to improve the output efficiency of
large language models is self-correction [52]. In the self-correction approach, the LLM uses the feedback guided or
prompted by itself to refine its results. One popular category of work uses human feedback to refine their results
directly [21, 23, 37, 49, 59]. Other studies employed different strategies to self-correct LLMs using automated feedback
such as self-training [7, 30], generate-then-rank [27, 75], feedback-guided decoding [79, 83], iterative post-hoc revision
[32, 90], etc. Furthermore, the advances in LLM have also brought much progress in LLM-based agents, with different
modules including Planning, Memory, Profile, and Action [73, 78], and various agent categories, such as Tool Agent,
Simulation Agent, Web Agent, Game Agent, etc. Our work also includes the evaluation of the LLM agent approach,
Okanagan, which has an additional round with reflection as the thinking pattern.
LLM Agent for Code Generation. Although still at an early stage, recently, there has been a rising stream of
research efforts to employ LLM agents for the task of code generation [1, 60, 62, 77, 82, 84, 89]. In the AI community,

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 35
the ReAct paper proposes a method for integrating reasoning and acting in language models to enhance their decisionmaking capabilities [84]. Reflexion introduces a framework where language agents improve their performance through
verbal reinforcement learning, simulating human-like reflection and adaptation [62]. Toolformer demonstrates that
language models can autonomously learn to use external tools, such as search engines and calculators, to improve task
performance [60]. SWE-Agent proposes a new agent designed specifically for software engineering tasks, leveraging
large language models to enhance productivity and decision-making [82]. CoderAgent introduces a model aimed at
automating coding tasks by utilizing advanced language models to generate and refine code snippets efficiently [89].
In the field of software engineering, RepairAgent [10] is one of the first to use an LLM-based agent for program repair
and code generation. This work follows the previous work in augmenting LLMs with API tools. Recently, CoRE [81] has
been proposed as a system that enables agent programming by using LLM as interpreters to process and execute natural
language instructions. Following a similar spirit of LLM agent, TICODER [18] is proposed as a test-driven interactive
workflow for more accurate code generation. Similarly, De-Hallucinator [16] is proposed as a code completion method
that combines retrieval-based code generation and iterative querying of the model. Different from the above works, the
proposed Okanagan in our work focuses on enhancing the communication capabilities of LLM for code generation
tasks. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to study and compare the communication capabilities of LLM agent
and Code LLMs in code generation tasks.
9

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we showed an initial step in the empirical study of the communication skills of LLMs in evaluating code
clarification and code generation. We argue that the proficiency of communication skills of LLMs is necessary for AI
systems to generate code with high standards, and, in the long term, to ask questions to acquire information that is just
enough to complete their tasks. We believe that elevated communication skills should be viewed as an important factor
in bridging the gap between LLMs and top-notch software developers. Although it needs additional conversational
inputs, we believe it is still necessary and worthwhile to evaluate this communication capability for coding tasks.
As a first step toward this effort, we created HumanEvalComm to evaluate the degree of communication skills. Based
on the new benchmark, we comprehensively evaluated different Code LLMs with the communication lens, where certain
information is manually modified in the original problem description. Furthermore, we proposed an LLM-based agent
approach, Okanagan, to identify and ask questions in ambiguous parts of code and descriptions for further refining the
generated code. We found that modifying the problem description greatly reduced Test Pass Rates and Pass@1 with
statistical significance. In terms of communication skills, more than 60% of responses from Code LLMs still generate
code rather than ask questions when the problem descriptions are manually modified. We also find that, compared
with LLM such as ChatGPT 3.5, Okanagan, as a LLM agent approach, can effectively increase Communication Rate and
Good Question Rate, and thus boost Test Pass Rate and Pass@1 when the problem descriptions are modified based on a
clarification type.
Besides benchmarks, techniques to further improve the communication skills of LLMs can be the next steps in
future work. Another interesting angle is to study how to tune the model to switch between under-communicating,
effective-communicating, and over-communicating. We envision that different AI programming agents in the future
will have various levels and styles of communication ability. This work can be seen as the first step toward evaluating
the communication skills of Code LLMs and LLM agents. Our benchmark and replication package are made public at
https://github.com/jie-jw-wu/human-eval-comm.

36
10

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback and suggestions, which helped improve

the quality of this work significantly. We also extend our gratitude to six graduate students at the University of British
Columbia who conducted the manual evaluation. Finally, we would like to thank the authors of the Non-Determinism
research of ChatGPT [50] and IdentityChain [45] for releasing their code. This research is supported by a grant from
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada RGPIN-2019-05175.

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 37
APPENDICES
A

APPENDIX: PROMPT TEMPLATES IN HUMANEVALCOMM

Prompt Template

Description

You are an expert software developer who writes high quality

Initial-round

code. With below information, please either generate Python3

for the model. Used in

code (Respond directly with code only with markdown), or ask

evaluation.

prompt

clarifying questions: {problem}
The original description of a coding problem is modified so that

Prompt for the LLM-

the requirements become inconsistent, incomplete, or ambiguous. based evaluator. Used in
Given

the

modified

description,

some

clarifying

questions

evaluation.

were raised to clarify the description. Given the original
and modified problem description, evaluate the quality of the
clarifying questions. Please provide an integer representing
the quality of questions (3: Good questions that recover the
modified requirements; 2: Fair questions but they cannot help
recover the modified requirements; 1: No questions).
QUALITY=[your int]
Please also provide answers to the clarifying questions to
recover the modified requirements in the original problem
description compared to the modified one. If there is no
clarifying questions at all, return empty answers.
ANSWERS=[your answer]
Please

strictly

follow

the

format

QUALITY=[the

int]

and

ANSWERS=[the answer] in the response! Surround your answer with
markdown!
### Questions: {clarifying_questions}
### Modified Problem Description: {problem}
### Original Description: {missing_information}
{problem}

Second-round prompt

{clarifying_questions}

for the model. Used in

{answer_to_questions}
Given

above

conversations,

evaluation.
generate

Python

code

directly

(Markdown) to solve the coding problem:
Table 14. Detailed Prompt Templates used in the HumanEvalComm evaluation in this research. We tested different prompt templates
and checked their impact to the results.

38

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard
1st Prompt
Variant

You are an expert software developer specialized in Python3. Review the problem
description and:
- If the description provides enough detail, proceed by writing the required Python3
code using markdown.
OR
- If further details are needed to ensure the solution is accurate and complete, please
list any specific questions you have about the problem.
### Problem Description:
{problem}

1st Prompt
One-Shot

You are an expert software developer specialized in Python3. In each turn, review the
problem description and:
- If the description provides accurate detail, proceed by writing the required Python3
code using markdown.
OR
- If further details are needed to ensure the solution is accurate and complete, list
clarifying questions about the problem without writing code.
### Problem Description:
def candidate(x: int, y: int):
"""
Return 2^n modulo p (be aware of numerics).
>>> candidate(3, 5)
3
>>> candidate(1101, 101)
2
>>> candidate(0, 101)
1
>>> candidate(3, 11)
8
>>> candidate(100, 101)
1
"""
### Response:
The problem description seems to be incomplete. It provides a function signature and
some test cases, but it doesn’t specify what the function is supposed to do. The docstring
suggests that the function should return 2𝑛 modulo 𝑝, but the function parameters (x,
y) don’t match with the variables in the docstring (n, p).
Here are my questions to clarify the problem:
1. What are the roles of the parameters x and y in the function?
2. Should the function return 2𝑛 modulo 𝑝 as suggested in the docstring? If so, which
parameter corresponds to n and which corresponds to p?
3. The test cases provided in the docstring don’t seem to match the function description.
Could you please provide correct test cases?
### Problem Description:
{problem}
### Response:
Table 15. Prompt variants used in prompt engineering for RQ4.

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 39
Prompt Template

Description

Generate Python code directly (Markdown) to solve the coding

Prompt to generate

problem.

code in Okanagan.

{problem}
Given the programming problem, ask clarifying questions if the

Prompt to ask questions

requirements in the given problem description are incomplete, in Okanagan.
inconsistent or ambiguous for solving the problem correctly and
passing the tests.
If

no

need

to

ask

clarifying

questions,

return

strictly

’NO_QUESTIONS’ only. Otherwise, return the clarifying questions.
### Problem:
{problem}
Table 16. Detailed Prompt Templates used in Okanagan as an LLM-based agent approach proposed in this research.

REFERENCES
[1] 2023. AutoGPT. https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/Auto-GPT AutoGPT v2.0.
[2] Hugging Face Accessed 2024. Big Code Models Leaderboard. Hugging Face. https://huggingface.co/spaces/bigcode/bigcode-models-leaderboard
Accessed on April 29, 2024.
[3] U. Alon, M. Zilberstein, O. Levy, and E. Yahav. 2019. Code2Vec: Learning Distributed Representations of Code. Proceedings of the ACM on
Programming Languages 3, POPL (2019), 1–29.
[4] Simon Arvidsson and Johan Axell. 2023. Prompt engineering guidelines for LLMs in Requirements Engineering. (2023).
[5] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le,
et al. 2021. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 (2021).
[6] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge, Yu Han, Fei Huang, et al. 2023. Qwen technical report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609 (2023).
[7] Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron
McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Olsson, Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Ethan
Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Kamile Lukosiute, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage,
Nicholas Schiefer, Noemí Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk,
Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Conerly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben
Mann, Dario Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. 2022. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback.
CoRR abs/2212.08073 (2022).
[8] Xiao Bi, Deli Chen, Guanting Chen, Shanhuang Chen, Damai Dai, Chengqi Deng, Honghui Ding, Kai Dong, Qiushi Du, Zhe Fu, et al. 2024. Deepseek
llm: Scaling open-source language models with longtermism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02954 (2024).
[9] Ali Borji. 2023. A categorical archive of chatgpt failures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03494 (2023).
[10] Islem Bouzenia, Premkumar Devanbu, and Michael Pradel. 2024. RepairAgent: An Autonomous, LLM-Based Agent for Program Repair. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.17134 (2024).
[11] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 1877–1901.
[12] N. D. Bui, Y. Yu, and L. Jiang. 2021. InferCode: Self-supervised Learning of Code Representations by Predicting Subtrees. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). 1186–1197.
[13] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
Greg Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[14] Diego Dermeval, Jéssyka Vilela, Ig Ibert Bittencourt, Jaelson Castro, Seiji Isotani, Patrick Brito, and Alan Silva. 2016. Applications of ontologies in
requirements engineering: a systematic review of the literature. Requirements engineering 21 (2016), 405–437.

40

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard

[15] Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. 2023. Improving factuality and reasoning in language models
through multiagent debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14325 (2023).
[16] Aryaz Eghbali and Michael Pradel. 2024. De-Hallucinator: Iterative Grounding for LLM-Based Code Completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01701
(2024).
[17] Hugging Face. 2023. Codeparrot. https://huggingface.co/codeparrot/codeparrot
[18] Sarah Fakhoury, Aaditya Naik, Georgios Sakkas, Saikat Chakraborty, and Shuvendu K Lahiri. 2024. LLM-based Test-driven Interactive Code
Generation: User Study and Empirical Evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10100 (2024).
[19] Angela Fan, Beliz Gokkaya, Mark Harman, Mitya Lyubarskiy, Shubho Sengupta, Shin Yoo, and Jie M Zhang. 2023. Large language models for
software engineering: Survey and open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03533 (2023).
[20] Z. Feng, D. Guo, D. Tang, N. Duan, X. Feng, M. Gong, L. Shou, B. Qin, T. Liu, and D. Jiang et al. 2020. CodeBERT: A Pre-trained Model for
Programming and Natural Languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08155 (2020).
[21] Patrick Fernandes, Aman Madaan, Emmy Liu, António Farinhas, Pedro Henrique Martins, Amanda Bertsch, José G. C. de Souza, Shuyan Zhou,
Tongshuang Wu, Graham Neubig, and André F. T. Martins. 2023. Bridging the Gap: A Survey on Integrating (Human) Feedback for Natural
Language Generation. CoRR abs/2305.00955 (2023).
[22] Mingqi Gao, Xinyu Hu, Jie Ruan, Xiao Pu, and Xiaojun Wan. 2024. Llm-based nlg evaluation: Current status and challenges. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.01383 (2024).
[23] Amelia Glaese, Nat McAleese, Maja Trebacz, John Aslanides, Vlad Firoiu, Timo Ewalds, Maribeth Rauh, Laura Weidinger, Martin J. Chadwick,
Phoebe Thacker, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Ramona Comanescu, Fan Yang, Abigail See, Sumanth Dathathri,
Rory Greig, Charlie Chen, Doug Fritz, Jaume Sanchez Elias, Richard Green, Sona Mokrá, Nicholas Fernando, Boxi Wu, Rachel Foley, Susannah
Young, Iason Gabriel, William Isaac, John Mellor, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Lisa Anne Hendricks, and Geoffrey Irving. 2022. Improving
Alignment of Dialogue Agents via Targeted Human Judgements. CoRR abs/2209.14375 (2022).
[24] Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guanting Chen, Xiao Bi, Y Wu, YK Li, et al. 2024. DeepSeek-Coder:
When the Large Language Model Meets Programming–The Rise of Code Intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14196 (2024).
[25] Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V Chawla, Olaf Wiest, and Xiangliang Zhang. 2024. Large language
model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680 (2024).
[26] Ahmed E Hassan, Gustavo A Oliva, Dayi Lin, Boyuan Chen, Zhen Ming, et al. 2024. Rethinking Software Engineering in the Foundation Model Era:
From Task-Driven AI Copilots to Goal-Driven AI Pair Programmers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10225 (2024).
[27] Hangfeng He, Hongming Zhang, and Dan Roth. 2023. Rethinking with Retrieval: Faithful Large Language Model Inference. CoRR abs/2301.00303
(2023).
[28] Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo, Collin Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song,
et al. 2021. Measuring coding challenge competence with apps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.09938 (2021).
[29] Dong Huang, Qingwen Bu, Jie M Zhang, Michael Luck, and Heming Cui. 2023. Agentcoder: Multi-agent-based code generation with iterative
testing and optimisation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13010 (2023).
[30] Jiaxin Huang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu, Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun Yu, and Jiawei Han. 2022. Large Language Models Can Self-Improve.
CoRR abs/2210.11610 (2022).
[31] Mehdi Jazayeri. 2004. The education of a software engineer. In Proceedings. 19th International Conference on Automated Software Engineering,
2004. IEEE, xviii–xxvii.
[32] Shuyang Jiang, Yuhao Wang, and Yu Wang. 2023. SelfEvolve: A Code Evolution Framework via Large Language Models. CoRR abs/2306.02907
(2023).
[33] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R Narasimhan. 2024. SWE-bench: Can Language
Models Resolve Real-world Github Issues?. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?
id=VTF8yNQM66
[34] Joonghoon Kim, Saeran Park, Kiyoon Jeong, Sangmin Lee, Seung Hun Han, Jiyoon Lee, and Pilsung Kang. 2023. Which is better? exploring
prompting strategy for llm-based metrics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03754 (2023).
[35] Tom Kocmi and Christian Federmann. 2023. Large language models are state-of-the-art evaluators of translation quality. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.14520 (2023).
[36] Neema Kotonya, Saran Krishnasamy, Joel Tetreault, and Alejandro Jaimes. 2023. Little giants: Exploring the potential of small llms as evaluation
metrics in summarization in the eval4nlp 2023 shared task. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00686 (2023).
[37] Julia Kreutzer, Shahram Khadivi, Evgeny Matusov, and Stefan Riezler. 2018. Can Neural Machine Translation Be Improved with User Feedback?. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (NAACL-HLT).
[38] Hao Li, Cor-Paul Bezemer, and Ahmed E Hassan. 2024. Software Engineering and Foundation Models: Insights from Industry Blogs Using a Jury of
Foundation Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09012 (2024).
[39] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin
Dal Lago, et al. 2022. Competition-level code generation with alphacode. Science 378, 6624 (2022), 1092–1097.

HumanEvalComm: Benchmarking the Communication Competence of Code Generation for LLMs and LLM Agent 41
[40] Jenny T Liang, Chenyang Yang, and Brad A Myers. 2023. Understanding the Usability of AI Programming Assistants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17125
(2023).
[41] Yongkang Liu, Shi Feng, Daling Wang, Yifei Zhang, and Hinrich Schütze. 2023. Evaluate What You Can’t Evaluate: Unassessable Generated
Responses Quality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14658 (2023).
[42] Yue Liu, Thanh Le-Cong, Ratnadira Widyasari, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, Li Li, Xuan-Bach D Le, and David Lo. 2023. Refining ChatGPT-Generated
Code: Characterizing and Mitigating Code Quality Issues. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12596 (2023).
[43] Zhijie Liu, Yutian Tang, Xiapu Luo, Yuming Zhou, and Liang Feng Zhang. 2023. No Need to Lift a Finger Anymore? Assessing the Quality of Code
Generation by ChatGPT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.04838 (2023).
[44] Ian R McChesney and Seamus Gallagher. 2004. Communication and co-ordination practices in software engineering projects. Information and
Software Technology 46, 7 (2004), 473–489.
[45] Marcus J Min, Yangruibo Ding, Luca Buratti, Saurabh Pujar, Gail Kaiser, Suman Jana, and Baishakhi Ray. 2023. Beyond accuracy: Evaluating
self-consistency of code large language models with identitychain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14053 (2023).
[46] Ivan Mistrík, John Grundy, Andre Van der Hoek, and Jim Whitehead. 2010. Collaborative software engineering: challenges and prospects. Springer.
[47] N. Nguyen and S. Nadi. 2022. An Empirical Evaluation of GitHub Copilot’s Code Suggestions. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference
on Mining Software Repositories. 1–5.
[48] Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. 2022. Codegen: An open large
language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13474 (2022).
[49] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex
Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, and
Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training Language Models to Follow Instructions with Human Feedback. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
[50] Shuyin Ouyang, Jie M Zhang, Mark Harman, and Meng Wang. 2023. LLM is Like a Box of Chocolates: the Non-determinism of ChatGPT in Code
Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02828 (2023).
[51] David N Palacio, Alejandro Velasco, Nathan Cooper, Alvaro Rodriguez, Kevin Moran, and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2024. Toward a theory of causation
for interpreting neural code models. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2024).
[52] Liangming Pan, Michael Saxon, Wenda Xu, Deepak Nathani, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang. 2023. Automatically Correcting Large Language
Models: Surveying the landscape of diverse self-correction strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03188 (2023).
[53] Roger S Pressman. 2005. Software engineering: a practitioner’s approach. Palgrave macmillan.
[54] M. Rabinovich, M. Stern, and D. Klein. 2017. Abstract Syntax Networks for Code Generation and Semantic Parsing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.07535
(2017).
[55] Zeeshan Rasheed, Muhammad Waseem, Mika Saari, Kari Systä, and Pekka Abrahamsson. 2024. Codepori: Large scale model for autonomous
software development by using multi-agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01411 (2024).
[56] Daniel Rodriguez-Cardenas, David N Palacio, Dipin Khati, Henry Burke, and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2023. Benchmarking causal study to interpret
large language models for source code. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 329–334.
[57] Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al.
2023. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950 (2023).
[58] Advait Sarkar, Andrew D Gordon, Carina Negreanu, Christian Poelitz, Sruti Srinivasa Ragavan, and Ben Zorn. 2022. What is it like to program with
artificial intelligence? arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06213 (2022).
[59] Jérémy Scheurer, Jon Ander Campos, Tomasz Korbak, Jun Shern Chan, Angelica Chen, Kyunghyun Cho, and Ethan Perez. 2023. Training Language
Models with Language Feedback at Scale. CoRR abs/2303.16755 (2023).
[60] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Patrick Schramowski, and Jacob Andreas. 2023. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761 (2023).
[61] Murray Shanahan. 2024. Talking about large language models. Commun. ACM 67, 2 (2024), 68–79.
[62] Noah Shinn, Nelson Labash, Mark Skreta, Shunyu Yao, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366 (2023).
[63] M. L. Siddiq, S. H. Majumder, M. R. Mim, S. Jajodia, and J. C. Santos. 2022. An Empirical Study of Code Smells in Transformer-Based Code Generation
Techniques. In 2022 IEEE 22nd International Working Conference on Source Code Analysis and Manipulation (SCAM). 71–82.
[64] Susan Elliott Sim, Steve Easterbrook, and Richard C Holt. 2003. Using benchmarking to advance research: A challenge to software engineering. In
25th International Conference on Software Engineering, 2003. Proceedings. IEEE, 74–83.
[65] D. Sobania, M. Briesch, and F. Rothlauf. 2022. Choose Your Programming Copilot: A Comparison of the Program Synthesis Performance of GitHub
Copilot and Genetic Programming. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 1019–1027.
[66] A. Svyatkovskiy, S. K. Deng, S. Fu, and N. Sundaresan. 2020. Intellicode Compose: Code Generation Using Transformer. In Proceedings of the 28th
ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 1433–1443.
[67] M. Tufano, D. Drain, A. Svyatkovskiy, S. Deng, and N. Sundaresan. 2020. Unit Test Case Generation with Transformers and Focal Context. arXiv
preprint arXiv: Software Engineering (2020).

42

Jie JW Wu and Fatemeh H. Fard

[68] Muhammad Tukur, Sani Umar, and Jameleddine Hassine. 2021. Requirement engineering challenges: A systematic mapping study on the academic
and the industrial perspective. Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering 46 (2021), 3723–3748.
[69] P. Vaithilingam, T. Zhang, and E. L. Glassman. 2022. Expectation vs. Experience: Evaluating the Usability of Code Generation Tools Powered by
Large Language Models. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts. 1–7.
[70] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is All You Need. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 30.
[71] Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. 2021. GPT-J-6B: A 6 billion parameter autoregressive language model.
[72] Jiaan Wang, Yunlong Liang, Fandong Meng, Zengkui Sun, Haoxiang Shi, Zhixu Li, Jinan Xu, Jianfeng Qu, and Jie Zhou. 2023. Is chatgpt a good nlg
evaluator? a preliminary study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04048 (2023).
[73] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. 2023. A survey
on large language model based autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11432 (2023).
[74] Y. Wang, W. Wang, S. Joty, and S. C. Hoi. 2021. CodeT5: Identifier-Aware Unified Pre-trained Encoder-Decoder Models for Code Understanding and
Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00859 (2021).
[75] Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Fei Xia, Bin Li, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. 2023. Large Language Models Are Better Reasoners with
Self-Verification. CoRR abs/2212.09561 (2023).
[76] Jim Whitehead. 2007. Collaboration in software engineering: A roadmap. In Future of Software Engineering (FOSE’07). IEEE, 214–225.
[77] Scott Wu. Accessed 2024. Introducing Devin, the first AI software engineer. Cognition. https://www.cognition-labs.com/introducing-devin
Accessed on April 8, 2024.
[78] Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. 2023. The rise
and potential of large language model based agents: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864 (2023).
[79] Yuxi Xie, Kenji Kawaguchi, Yiran Zhao, Xu Zhao, MinYen Kan, Junxian He, and Qizhe Xie. 2023. Decomposition Enhances Reasoning via
Self-Evaluation Guided Decoding. CoRR abs/2305.00633 (2023).
[80] Frank F Xu, Uri Alon, Graham Neubig, and Vincent Josua Hellendoorn. 2022. A systematic evaluation of large language models of code. In
Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Machine Programming. 1–10.
[81] Shuyuan Xu, Zelong Li, Kai Mei, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2024. CoRE: LLM as Interpreter for Natural Language Programming, Pseudo-Code
Programming, and Flow Programming of AI Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06907 (2024).
[82] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. Swe-agent: Agent-computer
interfaces enable automated software engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15793 (2024).
[83] Kaiyu Yang, Jia Deng, and Danqi Chen. 2022. Generating Natural Language Proofs with Verifier-Guided Search. In Proceedings of the 2022
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). 89–105.
[84] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Shixiang Shane Cao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Wen-tau Huang. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting
in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 (2023).
[85] W. Ye, R. Xie, J. Zhang, T. Hu, X. Wang, and S. Zhang. 2020. Leveraging Code Generation to Improve Code Retrieval and Summarization via Dual
Learning. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020. 2309–2319.
[86] Pengcheng Yin, Bowen Deng, Edgar Chen, Bogdan Vasilescu, and Graham Neubig. 2018. Learning to mine aligned code and natural language pairs
from stack overflow. In Proceedings of the 15th international conference on mining software repositories. 476–486.
[87] Daoguang Zan, Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Dianjie Lu, Bingchao Wu, Bei Guan, Wang Yongji, and Jian-Guang Lou. 2023. Large language models
meet nl2code: A survey. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).
7443–7464.
[88] Jintian Zhang, Xin Xu, and Shumin Deng. 2023. Exploring collaboration mechanisms for llm agents: A social psychology view. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.02124 (2023).
[89] Kechi Zhang, Jia Li, Ge Li, Xianjie Shi, and Zhi Jin. 2024. Codeagent: Enhancing code generation with tool-integrated agent systems for real-world
repo-level coding challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07339 (2024).
[90] Kechi Zhang, Zhuo Li, Jia Li, Ge Li, and Zhi Jin. 2023. Self-Edit: Fault-Aware Code Editor for Code Generation. CoRR abs/2305.04087 (2023).
[91] Ziyin Zhang, Chaoyu Chen, Bingchang Liu, Cong Liao, Zi Gong, Hang Yu, Jianguo Li, and Rui Wang. 2023. Unifying the perspectives of nlp and
software engineering: A survey on language models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07989 (2023).
[92] Albert Ziegler, Eirini Kalliamvakou, X Alice Li, Andrew Rice, Devon Rifkin, Shawn Simister, Ganesh Sittampalam, and Edward Aftandilian. 2022.
Productivity assessment of neural code completion. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Machine Programming.
21–29.

